SIEMENS

Betriebssystem

CONCURRENT CP/M-86 

ReferenceTu!de

'V

COPYRIGHT

Copyright  ©  1983  by  Digital  Research.  All rights reserved.  No  part  of  this publica-
tion  may  be  reproduced,  transmitted,  transcribed,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system,  or
translated  into  any  language  or  computer  language,  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,
electronic,  mechanical,  magnetic,  optical,  chemical, manual or  otherwise,  without  the
prior  written  permission  of  Digital  Research,  Post  Office  Box  579,  Pacific  Grove,
California,  93950.

DISCLAIMER

Digital  Research  makes  no  representations  or  warranties with  respect  to  the  contents
hereof  and  specifically  disclaims any  implied  warranties of  merchantability or  fitness
for  any  particular  purpose.  Further,  Digital  Research  reserves the  right  to  revise  this
publication  and  to  make  changes  from  time  to  time  in  the  content  hereof  without
obligation  of  Digital  Research  to  notify  any  person  of  such  revision or  changes.

TRADEMARKS

CP/M  and  CP/M-86  are  registered  trademarks  of Digital Research.  ASM-86,  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86,  DDT,  DDT-86,  MP/M,  and  MP/M-86  are  trademarks  of  Digital
Research.  Intel  and  MCS  are  registered  trademarks  of  Intel  Corporation.  ISIS-II  is a
trademark  of  Intel  Corporation.  IBM  is a  registered  trademark  of  International Busi-
ness  Machines.

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Operating  System  Programmer's  Reference  Guide  was  printed
in  the  United  States  of  America.

First  Edition: June  1983

Foreword

Concurrent  CP/M-86™  is an  operating  system  for  8086-  or  8088-based  microcom-
puter  systems.  It  supports  multiple  CP/M®  programming  environments  each  imple-
mented  upon  a  virtual  console.  A  different  task  runs concurrently in each  environment.

This  manual  describes 

interface  to  Concurrent
CP/M-86.  It  supports  the  applications  programmer  who  must  create  applications
programs  that  run  in the  CP/M-86® environment.

invariant  programming 

the 

Section  1 offers  an  overview  of the  entire  operating system.

t

Section  2  describes  the  structure  of  the  Concurrent CP/M-86 file system.

Section  3  explains  the  format,  structure,  and  uses  of  transient  commands  in  the

Concurrent  CP/M-86  environment.

Section  4  explains  the  creation  of  transient  command  files  in  the  Concurrent

CP/M-86  environment.

Section  5  documents  the  structure  and  creation  of  resident  system  processes  or

resident  command files permanently installed in the  Concurrent CP/M-86 environment.

Section  6  describes  all the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system calls.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  is supported  and  documented  through  four manuals:

•  The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Operating  System  User's  Guide  (hereafter  cited as
Concurrent  CP/M-86  User's  Guide  )  documents  the  user's  interface  to  Con-
current  CP/M-86,  explaining the  various  features  used  to  execute applications
programs  and  Digital Research  utility  programs.

111

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Operating  System  Programmer's  Reference  Guide
(hereafter  cited as  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Reference  Guide  ) doc-
uments  the  applications  programmer's  interface  to  Concurrent  CP/M-86,
explaining  the  internal file structure and  system entry points,  information that
is  essential  for  creating  applications  programs  that  run  in  the  Concurrent
CP/M-86  environment.

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Operating  System  Programmer's  Utilities  Guide
(hereafter  cited  as  Programmer's  Utilities Guide)  is the  Digital  Research  utility
programs  that  programmers  use to  write,  debug, and  verify  applications pro-
grams  written  for  the  Concurrent CP/M-86 environment.
The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Operating  System  System  Guide  (hereafter  cited  as
Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide)  documents  the  internal,  hardware-
dependent  structures  of  Concurrent  CP/M-86.

rv

Table of  Contents

1  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Overview

1.1  Introduction 
1.2  Supervisor (SUP) 
1.3  Real-time  Monitor  (RTM) 
1.3.1  Process  Dispatching 
1.3.2  Queue  Management 
1.3.3  System  Timing  Function 

1.4  Memory  Module  (MEM) 
1.5  Basic Disk  Operating  System  (BDOS) 
1.6  Character  I/O  Module  (CIO) 
1.7  Virtual  Console  Screen  Management 
1.8  Extended  Input/Output  System  (XIOS) 
1.9  Terminal  Message  Processes  (TMP) 
1.10  Transient  Programs 
1.11  System  Call  Calling  Conventions 
1.12  SYSTAT:  System  Status 

2  The Concurrent CP/M-86  File System

2.1  File  System  Overview 

2.1.1  File-access  System  Calls 
2.1.2  Drive-related  System  Calls 

2.2  File Naming  Conventions 
2.3  Disk  Drive  and  File Organization 
2.4  File Control  Block  Definition 

2.4.1  FCB Initialization and  Usage 
2.4.2  File Attributes 
2.4.3 

Interface  Attributes 
2.5  User Number  Conventions 
2.6  Directory  Labels and  XFCBs 
2.7  File  Passwords 
2.8  File  Date and  Time  Stamps:  SFCBs 
2.9  File Open  Modes 
2.10  File  Security 
2.11  Extended  File Locking 
2.12  Compatibility  Attributes 
2.13  Multisector  I/O 

1-1
1-5
1-5
1-5
1-8
1-9
1-10
1-11
1-12
1-12
1-13
1-14
1-14
1-15
1-16

2-1
2-2
2-3
2-5
2-8
2-10
2-13
2-15
2-17
2-18
2-19
2-23
2-24
2-27
2-29
2-32
2-34
2-37

Table of  Contents  (continued)

2.14  Concurrent  File Access 
2.15  File  Byte  Counts 
2.16  Record  Blocking and  Deblocking 
2.17  Reset, Access, and  Free Drive 
2.18  BDOS  Error Handling 

3  Transient  Commands

3.1  Transient Process  Load  and  Exit 
3.2  Command  File  Format 
3.3  Base Page Initialization 
3.4  Parent/Child  Relationships 

4  Command  File  Generation

4.1  Transient Execution Models 

4.1.1  The 8080 Memory  Model 
4.1.2  The  Small Memory  Model 
4.1.3  The Compact  Memory  Model 

4.2  GENCMD 
4.3 

Intel  Hexadecimal File Format 

5  Resident  System  Process  Generation

5.1  Introduction to  RSPs 
5.2  RSP Memory  Models 

5.2.1  8080  Model  RSP 
5.2.2  Small Model  RSP 
5.3  Multiple  Copies of  RSPs 
5.3.1  8080 Model 
5.3.2  Small Model 
5.3.3  Small  Model  with  Shared  Code 

5.4  Creating and  Initializing  an  RSP 

VI

2-38
2-41
2-42
2-43
2-47

3-1
3-2
3-4
3-7

4-1
4-2
4-4
4-6
4-8
4-11

5-1
5-1
5-2
5-2
5-3
5-4
5-4
5-4
5-4

Table  of  Contents  (continued)

5.4.1  The  RSP Header 
5.4.2  The  RSP  Process  Descriptor 
5.4.3  The  RSP User  Data  Area 
5.4.4  The  RSP Stack 
5.4.5  The  RSP Command  Queue 
5.4.6  Multiple  Processes  within  an  RSP 

5.5  Developing  and  Debugging  an  RSP 

6  System  Calls

6.1  System  Call  Summary 
6.2  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Calls 

6.2.1  Console  I/O  System  Calls 
6.2.2  Device  System  Calls 
6.2.3  Disk  Drive  System  Calls 
6.2.4  File-access  System  Calls 
6.2.5  List  Device  I/O  System  Calls 
6.2.6  Memory  System  Calls 
6.2.7  Process/Program  System  Calls 
6.2.8  Queue  System  Calls 
6.2.9  System  Information  System  Calls 

Appendixes

A  Glossary 
B  ASCII  and  Hexadecimal  Conversions 
C  Error Codes 
D  ECHO.A86  Listing 

Vll

5-8
5-8
5-9
5-10
5-10
5-11
5-12

6-14
6-21
6-22
6-42
6-45
6-66
6-129
6-135
6-146
6-171
6-182

A-l
B-1
C-l
D-l

Table of  Contents  (continued)

Tables

FCB Field  Definitions 
File  Attribute  Definitions 

Registers  Used  by System  Calls 
1-1. 
2-1. 
File  System  Calls 
2-2.  Valid  Filename  Delimiters 
Filetype  Conventions 
2-3. 
2-4.  Drive  Capacity 
2-5. 
2.6. 
2-7.  BDOS  Interface Attributes F5' and F6' 
2-8.  Directory  Label  Field  Definitions 
2-9.  XFCB  Field  Definitions 
2-10.  Password  Protection  Modes 
2-11.  Compatibility  Attribute Definitions 
2-12.  BDOS  Physical Errors 
2-13.  BDOS  Extended  Errors 
2-14.  BDOS  Error  Codes 
2-15.  BDOS  Physical and  Extended  Errors 
3-1. 
Group  Descriptors 
3-2.  Group  Descriptor  Fields 
4-1. 
4-2. 
6-1. 
6-2.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System Calls 
6-3. 
System  Call  Summary 
6-4.  Data  Structures Index 
6-5.  CX  Error  Code Reports 
6-6.  ACB Field  Definitions 
6-7.  C_RAWIO  Calling  Values 
6-8. 
Console  Buffer  Field  Definitions 
6-9.  C_READSTR  Line-editing  Characters 
6-10.  DPB Field  Definitions 
6-11.  PFCB  Field  Definitions 
6-12.  FCB Initialization 
6-13.  MCB  Field Definitions 
6-14.  MPB Field  Definitions 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Memory  Models 
Intel Hex  Field  Definitions 
System  Call  Categories 

vm

1-15
2-4
2-6
2-8
2-9
2-12
2-16
2-17
2-20
2-22
2-23
2-35
2-49
2-50
2-52
2-55
3-3
3-4
4-1
4-13
6-2
6-4
6-14
6-18
6-20
6-23
6-32
6-35
6-35
6-50
6-92
6-94
6-136
6-137

Table of  Contents  (continued)

Tables

6-15.  APB Field  Definitions 
6-16.  Command  Line  Buffer  Field  Definitions 
6-17.  PD  Field  Definitions 
6-18.  UDA Field  Definitions 
6-19.  CPB Field  Definitions 
6-20.  QPB  Field  Definitions 
6-21.  QD  Field  Definitions 
6-22.  SYSDAT Table  Data  Fields 
6-23.  TOD  Field  Definitions 
B-l.  ASCII  Symbols 
B-2.  ASCII  Conversion  Table 
C-l.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Error  Codes 

Figures

FCB - File Control  Block 

1-1.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Virtual/Physical  Environments 
1-2.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Functional  Modules 
2-1. 
2-2.  Directory  Label  Format 
2-3.  XFCB  -  Extended  File Control  Block 
2-4.  Directory  Record  with  SFCB 
2-5. 
SFCB  Subfields 
Disk  System  Reset 
2-6. 
3-1.  CMD  File  Header  Format 
3-2.  Group  Descriptor  Format 
3-3.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Base  Page  Values 
4-1.  Concurrent CP/M-86 8080  Memory  Model 
4-2. 
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Small  Memory  Model 
4-3.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Compact  Memory  Model 
4-4. 
5-1. 
5-2.  RSP Header  Format 
5-3.  RSP Command  Queue Message 

Intel  Hexadecimal  File  Formats 
8080 and  Small  RSP Models 

IX

6-147
6-150
6-155
6-160
6-168
6-171
6-177
6-189
6-195
B-l
B-2
C-l

1-1
1-3
2-11
2-19
2-21
2-25
2-26
2-45
3-2
3-3
3-5
4-3
4-5
4-6
4-12
5-2
5-3
5-5

Table  of  Contents  (continued)

Figures

PFCB -  Parse Filename Control  Block 

5-4.  RSP Data  Segment 
6-1.  ACB - Assign Control  Block 
6-2.  Console  Buffer  Format 
6-3.  Drive,  R/O,  or  Login  Vector  Structure 
6-4.  DPB - Disk  Parameter  Block 
6-5.  Disk  Free Space  Field Format 
6-6. 
6-7.  MCB - Memory  Control  Block 
6-8.  MPB - Memory  Parameter  Block 
6-9.  MFPB - M_FREE  Parameter  Block 
6-10.  APB - Abort  Parameter Block 
6-11.  CLI Command  Line  Buffer 
6-12.  PD - Process  Descriptor 
6-13.  UDA - User Data  Area 
6-14.  CPB - Call  Parameter Block 
6-15.  QPB - Queue  Parameter  Block 

5-7
6-22
6-34
6-45
6-50
6-66
6-91
6-135
6-136
6-139
6-146
6-150
6-154
6-159
6-167
6-171

Section 1
Concurrent  CP/M-86 System Overview

1.1 

Introduction

Concurrent  CP/M-86  is a  single-user,  multitasking  operating  system  that  lets  you
run  multiple  programs  simultaneously  by  initiating  tasks  on  two  or  more  virtual
consoles.  It  is  compatible  with  the  CP/M-86  single-tasking operating  system. Appli-
cations  programs  have access to  system calls used by Concurrent CP/M-86 to  control
the  multiprogramming  environment.  As  a  result,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports
extended  features,  such  as  communication  among  and  synchronization of  indepen-
dently  running  processes.  Figure  1-1  depicts  the  relationships  between  applications
programs,  virtual  environments, virtual consoles,  and  the physical console.

LOGICAL  OS 

1 

PHYSICAL 

1  O  SYSTEM

APPLICATION
PROGRAM
00

I 
!

/
f
\
N

//
\
\

APPLICATION
PROGRAM
01

APPLICATION
PROGRAM
02

TERMINAL
MESSAGE
PROCESS
03

K
\
/
V

\
\

K
>
/

\
\
I
V

VIRT
ENVIRO
0

NMENT 
n 

•  ,. 
1 f\
I
_,\ 

~" 
1 

VIRT
ENVIRO
0

HAI 
NMENT 

1 
|y| 

<JN 

n 
I 

y|

1!
-i\ 

_ 

I 

t 

I/1K

_iN 

VIRT
ENVIHC
0

UAL 
NMENT 

' 

VIR1
ENVIRC
C

UAL 
NMENT 

-L 

N

\
\

/

N

I/
*

1

1

l

' 

,

i
i
I
'

|

i
i
i

1 

1
1

VIRTUAL
CONSOLE
00

VIRTUAL
CONSOLE
01

VIRTUAL
CONSOLE
03

_K
)

V 

PHYSICAL
CONSOLE

DISK
DRIVE
A

DISK
DRIVE
B

DISK
DRIVE
P

HARDCOPY
PRINTER

Figure  1-1.  Concurrent CP/M-86 Virtual/Physical Environments

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1-1

1.1 

Introduction 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

In  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  environment there  is an important distinction  between
a  program  and  a  process.  A  program  is  simply a  block  of  code  residing somewhere
in  memory  or  on  disk;  it  is  essentially  static.  A  process,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a
dynamic  entity.  You  can  think  of  it  as  a  logical  machine that  executes  not  only  the
program  code,  but  also  the  operating  system  routines  necessary to  support  the  pro-
gram's  functions.

When  Concurrent  CP/M-86  loads  a  program,  it  creates  a  process  associated  with
the  loaded  program.  Subsequently, it  is  the  process,  rather  than  the  program,  that
obtains  access  to  the  system's  resources.  Thus,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  monitors  the
process,  not  the  program.  This  distinction  is  a  subtle  one,  but  vital  to  your  under-
standing  of  system  operation  as  a  whole.

Processes  running  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  fall  into  two  categories:  transient
processes  and  Resident  System  Processes  (RSPs).  Transient  processes  run  programs
loaded  into  memory  from  disk  in  response  to  a  user  command  or  system calls made
by  another  process.  Resident  system processes  run  code  that  is a part  of the  operating
system  itself.  RSPs  become  an  integral  part  of  the  operating  system  image  during
system  generation.  They  are immediately available to  perform operating system tasks.
For  example,  the  CLOCK  process  is  an  RSP that  maintains  the  time  of  day  within
the  operating  system.

The  following  list  briefly  summarizes Concurrent  CP/M-86's capabilities.

•  Interprocess  communication,  synchronization, and mutual exclusion functions

are  provided  by  system  queues.

•  A  logical  interrupt  mechanism  using flags  allows  Concurrent  CP/M-86  to

interface  with  any physical  interrupt  structure.

•  System  timing  functions enable processes  running under  Concurrent  CP/M-86
to  compute  elapsed  times,  delay execution  for  specified  intervals, and  to  access
and  set the  current  date  and  time.

•  Shared file system allows  multiple programs  to access  common  data files while

maintaining  data  integrity.

1-2

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

1.1  Introduction

•  Virtual  console  handling lets a  single  user  run  multiple  programs,  each  in its

own  console  environment.

•  Real-time  process  control  allows  communications  and data  acquisition with-

out  loss  of information.

Functionally,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is  composed  of  several  distinct  modules,  as

shown  in  Figure  1-2.

OS SUPERVISOR

1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

1 

1
1
1
EXTENDED I/O SYSTEM

I

I

1
'

\ 

1 

1

* 

t

Figure  1-2.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Functional  Modules

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1-3

1.1 

Introduction 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  Supervisor  (SUP) 
The  Real-time  Monitor  (RTM)
The  Memory  Management  Module  (MEM)
The  Character  I/O Module  (CIO)
The  Virtual  Console  Screen  Manager
The  Basic Disk  Operating  System  (BDOS)
The  Extended  I/O  System  (XIOS)
The  Terminal  Message  Processor  (TMP)

*^

The  SUP module  handles  miscellaneous  system  calls such  as  returning the  version
number  or  the  address  of  the  System  Data  Area.  SUP also  calls  other  system  calls
when  necessary.

The  RTM  module  monitors  the  execution  of  running  processes  and  arbitrates

conflicts  for  the  system's  resources.

The  MEM  module  allocates  and  frees  memory  upon  demand  from  executing

processes.

The  CIO  module  handles  all  character  I/O  for  console  and  list  devices  in  the

system.

The  Virtual  Console  Screen  Manager  extends  the  CIO  to  support  virtual  console

environments.

The  BDOS  is  the  hardware-independent  module  that  contains  the  logically  invar-
iant  portion  of  the  file  system  for  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The  BDOS  file  system  is
explained  in  detail  in  Section  2.

The  XIOS  is the  hardware-dependent  module  that  defines  the  interface  of  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86  to  a  specific  hardware  environment.  See  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86
System  Guide  for  an  explanation  of  the  XIOS.

1-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

1.1 

Introduction

When  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is executing  a  single program  on  a  single virtual  con-
sole,  its  speed  approximates  that  of  CP/M-86.  But when  multiple  processes  are  run-
ning  on  several  virtual  consoles,  the  execution  of  each  individual  process  slows
according  to  the  proportion  of  I/O  to  CPU  resources  it  requires.  A  process  that
performs  a  large  amount  of  I/O  in  proportion  to  computing  exhibits  only  minor
speed  degradation.  This  also  applies  to  a  process  that  performs  a  large  amount  of
computing,  but  runs  concurrently  with  other  processes  that  are  largely  I/O-bound.
On  the  other  hand,  significant  speed  degradation  occurs  where  more  than  one  com-
pute-bound  process  is  running.

1.2  Supervisor (SUP)

The  Supervisor  module  (SUP) manages  the  interface  between  processes  and  the
operating  system  kernel.  It  also  manages  internal communication  between  operating
system  modules.  All system  calls,  whether  they  originate  from  a  transient  process  or
internally  from  another  system  module,  go  through  a  common  table-driven function
interface  in  SUP.  SUP  also  handles  the  P_LOAD  (Load  Process)  and  P_CLI  (Call
Command  Line Interpreter) system  calls.

1.3  Real-time Monitor  (RTM)

The  Real-time Monitor  (RTM)  is the  real-time multitasking nucleus of  Concurrent
CP/M-86.  The  RTM  performs process  dispatching, queue management, flag manage-
ment,  device  polling,  and  system  timing  tasks.  User  programs  can  also  call  many of
the  RTM  system  calls used  to  perform  these  tasks.

1.3.1  Process  Dispatching

Although  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is a  multiprocess operating  system,  only  one  process
has  access  to  the  CPU  resource  at  any  given  time.  Unless  you  specifically  write  a
program  to  communicate  or  synchronize execution  with  other  processes,  a  process  is
unaware  of  other  processes  competing  for  system  resources.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1.3  Real-time Monitor  (RTM) 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  primary  task  of  the  RTM  is  to  transfer, or  dispatch,  the  CPU resource  from
one  process  to  another.  The  RTM  module  called the  Dispatcher  performs this  task.
The  RTM  maintains two  data  structures,  the  Process  Descriptor  (PD) and  the  User
Data  Area  (UDA),  for  each  process  running under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The  Dis-
patcher  uses  these  data  structures  to  save  and  restore  the  current  state  of  each  run-
ning process.

Each  process  in  the  system  resides  in  one  of  three  states:  ready,  running, or  sus-
pended.  A ready process  is one  that  is waiting for  the  CPU resource only. A running
process  is one  that  the  CPU is currently executing. A suspended process  is one  that is
waiting  for  a  system  resource  or  a  specified  event,  such  as  the  occurrence  of  an
interrupt,  an  indication  that  polled  hardware  is  ready,  or  the  expiration  of  a  delay
period.

,  ;  V 

I

Any  existing  process  is  represented  on  a  system  list.  The  Dispatcher  removes  a
process  from  one  list  and  places  it  on  another.  The  Process  Descriptor  of  the  cur-
rently  running process  is the  first  entry on  the  Ready List.  Other  processes  ready  to
run  are  represented  on  the  Ready  List in  order  of  priority.  Suspended processes  are
on  other System  Lists,  depending  on  why the processes were  suspended.

A  dispatch  operation  can  be summarized as follows:

1.  The  Dispatcher  suspends  the  process  from  execution  and  stores  its  current

state  in the  Process  Descriptor  and  the UDA.

2.  The  Dispatcher  places  the  process  on  an  appropriate  System List, depending
on  why  the  Dispatcher  was  called. For  example, if a process  is to  delay for  a
certain  number of  system ticks,  its  Process Descriptor  is placed  on  the  Delay
List.  Where  a  process  releases a  resource,  the  process  is  usually  placed  back
on  the  Ready List. If another  process  is waiting for the  resource, that  process
is taken  off  its  current System List and  also placed on  the  Ready List.

3.  The  highest priority  process  on  the  Ready List is chosen  for execution.  If  two
or  more  processes  have  the  same  priority,  the  process  that  has  waited  the
longest  executes  first.

4.  The  Dispatcher  restores  the  state  of  the  selected  process  from  its  Process

Descriptor  and  UDA, and  gives it the  CPU  resource.

1-6

m  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

1.3  Real-time Monitor (RTM)

5.  The  process  executes  until  it  needs  a  busy  resource,  a  resource  needed  by
another  process  becomes  available,  or  an  interrupt  occurs.  At  this  point,  a
dispatch  occurs,  allowing  another  process  to  run.

Only  processes  on  the  Ready  List  are  eligible  for  selection  during  dispatch.  By
definition,  a  process  is  on  the  Ready  List  if  it  is  waiting  only  for  the  CPU  resource.
Processes  waiting  for  other  system  resources  cannot  execute  until  the  resources  they
require  are  available.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  blocks  a  process  from  execution  if  it  is
waiting  for:

•  a queue  message  so it can complete  a Q_READ  operation.

•  space  to  become  available in a queue so it can complete  a Q_WRITE  operation.

•  a console  or list device to become  available.

•  a  specified  number  of  system  clock  ticks  before  it  can  be  removed  from  the

system  Delay  List.

•  an I/O event  to  complete.

\

\

These  situations  are  discussed  in greater  detail  in  the  following  sections.

A  running  process  not  needing  a  resource  and  not  releasing  one  runs  until  an
interrupt  causes  a  dispatch.  While  not  all  interrupts  cause  dispatches,  the  system
clock  generates  interrupts  every  clock  tick  and  forces  a  dispatch  each  time.  Clock
ticks  usually occur  60  times  a  second  (approximately every  16.67  milliseconds),  and
allow  time  sharing  within  a  real-time  environment.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  is  a  priority-driven  system.  This  means  that  during  a  dis-
patch,  the  operating  system  gives  the  CPU  resource  to  the  process  with  the  best
priority.  The  Dispatcher  allots  equal  shares  of  the  system's  resources  to  processes
with  the  same  priority.  With  priority  dispatching,  the  system  never  passes  control  to
a  lower-priority  process  if  there  is  a  higher-priority  process  on  the  Ready  List.  Because
high-priority,  compute-bound  processes  tend  to  monopolize  the  CPU  resource,  it  is
best  to  reduce  their  priority  to  avoid  degrading  overall  system  performance.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1-7

1.3  Real-time  Monitor  (RTM) 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

1.3.2  Queue  Management

Queues  perform  several  critical  functions  for  processes  running  under  Concurrent
CP/M-86.  A  process  can  use  a  queue  for  communicating with  another  process,  syn-
chronizing  its  execution  with  that  of  another  process,  and  for  exclusion  of  other
processes  from  protected  system  resources.  A  process  can  make,  open,  delete,  read
from,  or  write  to  a queue with  system calls similar to  those used to  manage disk files.

Each  system  queue  consists  of  two  parts:  the  queue  descriptor,  and  the  queue
buffer.  Concurrent  CP/M-86 implements these  special data  structures  as memory files
that  contain  room  for  a  specified number of  fixed-length  messages.

i 

- 

•

When  the  Q_MAKE  system  call  creates  a  queue,  this  queue  is  assigned  a  unique
8-character  name.  As the  name  queue  implies, messages are  read  from  a  queue on  a
first-in,  first-out  basis.

A  process  can  read  from  or  write  to  a  queue  conditionally or  unconditionally. If
the  queue  is empty  when  a  conditional  read  is performed, or  full  when  a conditional
write  is  performed,  the  system  returns  an  Error  Code  to  the  calling process.  On  the
other  hand,  if  a  process  attempts  an  unconditional  queue operation  in  these circum-
stances,  the  system  suspends  it  from  execution  until the  operation  becomes possible.

More  than  one  process  can  wait  to  read  or  write  a  queue  message  from  the  same
queue  at  the  same  time.  When  these  operations  become  possible, the  system  restores
the  highest  priority  process  first;  processes  with  the  same  priority  are  restored  on  a
first-come, 

first-served 

basis. 

1

Mutual  exclusion  queues  are  a  special  type  of  queue  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.
They  contain  one  message of zero  length and  their names follow a convention, begin-
ning  with  the  upper-case  letters  MX.  A  mutual  exclusion  queue  acts  as  a  binary
semaphore, ensuring  that  only  one process  uses  a resource  at  any  time.

Access to  a  resource  protected  by a mutual  exclusion  queue takes place as follows:

1.  A process  issues  an  unconditional  Q_READ  call to  the MX  queue  protecting

the  resource, thereby  suspending  itself  if the  message  is not  available.

1-8

m DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

1.3  Real-time Monitor  (RTM)

2.  When  the  message  becomes  available,  the  process  accesses  the  protected
resource.  Note  that  from  the  time  the  process  issues  the  unconditional read,
any  other  process  attempting to  access the  same resource is suspended.

3.  The  process  writes  the  zero-length  message  back  to  the  queue  when  it  has
finished  using  the  protected  resource,  thus  freeing  the  resource  for  other
processes.

As  an  example,  the  system  mutual  exclusion  queue,  MXdisk,  ensures  that  processes
cannot  access  the file system simultaneously. Note that the BDOS, not  the application
software,  executes  the  preceding series of queue calls. Therefore the  mutual exclusion
process  is transparent  to  the  programmer,  who  is only responsible for  originating the
disk  system  calls.

Mutual  exclusion  queues  differ  from  normal  queues in  another  way. When  a  process
reads  a  message  from  a  mutual exclusion queue,  the  RTM  notes  the  Process  Descrip-
tor  address  within  the  Queue  Descriptor.  This  establishes  the  owner  of  the  queue
message.  If  the  operating  system  aborts  the  process  while  it  owns  the  mutual exclu-
sion  message,  the  RTM  automatically  writes  the  message  back  to  all  mutual  exclu-
sion  queues  whose  messages  are  owned  by  the  aborted  process.  This  grants  other
processes  access  to  protected  resources  owned  by the  aborted  process.

1.3.3  System Timing  Functions

Concurrent  CP/M-86's timing system calls  include keeping the time of day  and  delay-
ing  the  execution  of  a  process  for  a  specified  period  of  time.  An  internal  process
the  time  of  day  for  the  system.  This  process  issues
called  CLOCK  provides 
DEV_WAITFLAG  system  calls  on  the  system's  one  second  flag,  Flag  2.  When  the
XIOS  Tick  Interrupt  Handler  sets  this  flag,  it  initiates  the  CLOCK  process,  which
then  increments  the  internal  time  and  date.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1-9

1.3  Real-time Monitor  (RTM) 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Subsequently,  the  CLOCK  process  makes  another  DEV_WAITFLAG  call  and  sus-
pends  itself  until  the flag is set again.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  provides system calls  that
allow  you  to  set  and  access  the  internal  date  and  time.  In  addition,  the file system
uses  the  internal  time  and  date  to  record  when  a  file  is  updated,  created,  or  last
accessed. 

} 

!

The  P_DELAY  system  call  replaces  the  typical  programmed  delay  loop  for  delay-
ing  process  execution.  P_DELAY  requires  that  Flag  1,  the  system  tick  flag,  be  set
approximately  every  16.67  milliseconds,  or  60  times a  second;  the  XIOS Tick  Inter-
rupt  Handler  also  sets  this  flag.  When  a  process  makes  a  P_DELAY system  call,  it
specifies  the  number  of  ticks  for  which  the  operating  system  is  to  suspend  it  from
execution. The  system  maintains  the  address  of the  Process Descriptor  for the  process
on  an  internal  Delay  List along  with  its current  delay tick  count.  When  a DEV_SET-
FLAG  call  occurs, setting flag 1, the tick  count  is decremented.  When the delay  count 
goes  to  zero,  the  system  removes  the process  from  the  Delay List and  places  it on  the
Ready  List. 

. 

, 

,  ' 

t

^.

Note: 
the  length  of a tick  might  vary from  installation to  installation. For  instance,
in  Europe,  a  tick  is  commonly  20  milliseconds,  yielding  50  ticks  per  second.  The
description  of  the  P_DELAY system  call in Section  6 describes  how  to  determine the
correct  number  of ticks  to  delay  1  second.

1.4  Memory  Module  (MEM)

Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports  an  extended, fixed partition  model of memory man-
agement;  the  Memory  Module  handles  all  memory  management  system  calls.  In
practice,  the  exact  method  that  the  operating  system  uses to  allocate  and  free  mem-
ory  is  transparent  to  the  application  program.  Therefore  you  should  take  care  to
write  code  independent  of  the  memory  management model;  use only the  Concurrent
CP/M-86-specific  memory  system  calls described  in  Section  6.

1-10

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

1.5  Basic Disk  Operating  System (BDOS)

1.5  Basic Disk  Operating  System  (BDOS) 

«-«

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  BDOS  is  an  upward-compatible  version  of  the  single-
tasking  CP/M-86  BDOS.  It handles file creation  and  deletion,  facilitates  sequential  or
random  file  access,  and  allocates  and  frees  disk  space.  In  most  cases,  CP/M-86  pro-
grams  that  make  BDOS  calls  for  I/O  can  run  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  without
modification.  Concurrent  CP/M-86's  BDOS  is extended  to  provide  support  for  mul-
tiple  virtual  consoles  and  list  devices.  In  addition,  the  file  system  is  extended  to
provide  services  required  in a  multitasking environment. The  major extensions  to  the
file system  are

•  File  locking.  Files  opened  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  cannot  be  opened  or
deleted  by  other  tasks.  This  feature  prevents  accidental  conflicts  with  other
tasks.

•  Shared  access  to files. As a  special  option,  independent  users  can  open  the
same  file  in  shared  or  unlocked  mode.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports  record
locking  and  unlocking  commands  for files opened  in  this  mode  and  protects
files opened  in  shared  mode  from  deletion  by other  tasks.

•  Date  Stamps.  The BDOS  optionally  supports  two time  and date  stamps,  one
recording  when  a  file  is  updated,  and  the  other  recording  when  the  file  was
created  or  last  accessed.

•  Password  Protection.  The password  protection  feature  is optional  at either the
file or  drive  level.  The  operator  or  applications  program  assigns  disk  drive
passwords,  while application programs  can  assign file protection  passwords  in
several  modes.

•  Extended  Error  Module.  Besides the default  error  mode,  Concurrent  CP/M-86
has two optional error-handling  modes  that  return  an error code to the calling

L, 

process  in t he event of an irrecoverable  disk  error.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

— 

.
1-11

1.6  Character I/O  Module  (CIO) 

1.6  Character I/O  Module  (CIO) 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide o

, r

The  Character  I/O  module  handles  all  console  and  list  I/O.  Under  Concurrent
CP/M-86,  every  character  I/O  device  is  associated  with  a  data  structure  called  a
Console  Control  Block  (CCB) or  a  List  Control  Block  (LCB).  These  data  structures
reside  in  the  XIOS.  The  CCB  contains  the  current  owner,  status  information,  line
editing  variables,  and  the  root  of  a  linked  list  of  Process  Descriptors  (PDs) that  are
waiting  for  access.  More  than  one  process  can  wait  for  access  to  a  single  console.
These  processes  are  maintained  on  a  linked  list  of  Process  Descriptors  in  priority
order.  The  LCBs contain  similar information about  the  list  devices. See the  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for  more  information  about  LCBs and  CCBs.

1.7  Virtual Console  Screen Management 

*  at

, 

•  »

Virtual  console  screen  management  is  coordinated  by  four  separate  modules:  the
CIO,  the  PIN  (Physical  INput)  and  VOUT  (Virtual  OUTput)  processes,  and  the
XIOS.  The  line  editing  associated  with  the  C_READSTR  call  is  performed  in  the
CIO.  The  PIN  process  handles  keyboard  input  for  all  the  virtual  consoles;  it  also
traps  and  implements the  CTRL-C,  CTRL-S,  CTRL-Q,  CTRL-P,  and  CTRL-O  func-
tions.  The  VOUT  process  spools  console  output  from  processes  running  on  back-
ground  buffered  mode  consoles,  and  handshakes  with  the  PIN  process  to  display
spooled  console  output  when  the  background  console  is brought  to  the foreground.
The  XIOS  decides  which  special  keys  represent  the  virtual  consoles,  and  returns  a
special  code  from  IO_CONIN  when  you  request  a  screen  switch.  The  XIOS  also
implements  any  screen  saving and  restoring when  screens are  switched.  See the  Con-
current  CP/M-86  System  Guide  and  the  discussion  of the  IO_SWITCH  function.

The  PIN  process  reads  the  keyboard  by  directly  calling  the  XIOS  IO_CONIN
function.  This  is  the  only  place  in  the  operating  system  IO_CONIN  is  called.  The
PIN  scans  the  input  stream  from  the  keyboard  for  switch  screen  requests  and  the
special  function keystrokes  CTRL-C,  CTRL-S,  CTRL-Q,  CTRL-P,  and  CTRL-O.  All
other  keyboard  input  is written  to  the  VINQ  (Virtual Console  INput  Queue)  associ-
ated  with  the  foreground  virtual  console.  The  data  in  the  VINQ  becomes  a  type-
ahead  buffer  for  each  virtual console,  and  is returned to  the  process  attached  to  that
console  as it performs console  input.

1-12

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

1.7  Virtual  Console  Screen Management

When  PIN  sees  a  CTRL-C  it  calls  P_ABORT  to  abort  the  process  attached  to  the
virtual  console,  flushes  the  type-ahead  buffer  in  the  VINQ,  turns  off  CTRL-S,  and
performs  a  DRV_RESET  call  for  each  logged-in  drive. The  P_ABORT  call succeeds
when  the  Process  Keep  flag  is  not  on,  saving  the  Terminal  Message  Processes  (refer
to  P_CREATE  for  information  on  the  process  descriptor).  The  DRV_RESET calls
affect  only  the  removable  media  drives,  as  specified  in  the  CKS  field  of  the  Disk
Parameter  Blocks  in  the  XIOS  (refer  to  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for
further  details  on  Disk  Parameter Blocks).

CTRL-S  stops  any  output  to  the  screen.  CTRL-S  stays  set  when  a  virtual  console

is switched  to  the  background.

CTRL-O  discards  any  console  output  to  the  virtual console.  CTRL-O  is turned off
when  any  other  key  is  subsequently pressed,  except  for  the  keys  representing  the
virtual  consoles.

CTRL-P  echoes  console  output  to  the  default  list device  specified  in  the  LIST field
of  the  process  descriptor  attached  to  the  virtual console.  If the  list  device is attached
to  a  process,  a  PRINTER  BUSY  message  appears.

All  of  the  above  control  keys can  be  disabled  by  the  C_MODE  call. When  one  of
the  above  control  characters  is disabled with  C_MODE  or  when  the  process  owning
the  virtual  console  is  using the  C_RAWIO  call, the  PIN  does  not  act  on  the  control
character  but  instead  writes  it  to  the  VINQ.  It  is  thus  possible  to  read  any  of  the
above  control  characters  from  an  application  program.  These  control  keys  are  dis-
cussed  in  depth  in  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  User's  Guide.

1.8  Extended  Input/Output  System (XIOS)

The  XIOS  module  is  similar  to  the  CP/M-86  Basic Input/Output  System  (BIOS)
module,  but  it  is extended  in  several ways.  Primitive  operations,  such  as  console  I/O,
are  modified  to  support  multiple virtual  consoles.  Several new  primitive system calls,
such  as  DEV_POLL,  support  Concurrent  CP/M-86's  additional  features,  including
elimination  of  wait  loops  for  real-time I/O  operations.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

. 

.

1-13

1.9  Terminal Message  Processes (TMP) 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

1.9  Terminal Message Processes  (TMP)

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Terminal Message  Processes  (TMPs) are  resident system
processes  that  accept  command  lines from  the virtual consoles and  call  the Command
Line  Interpreter  (CLI)  to  execute  them.  The  TMP  prints  the  prompt  on  the  virtual
consoles.

Each  virtual console  has  an  independent TMP  defining  that  console's  environment,

including default disk,  user  number, printer,  and  console.

1.10  Transient  Programs

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  a transient program  is one that  is not system-resident.
The  system  must  load  such  programs  from  disk  into  available  memory every  time it
executes.  The  command file of  a  transient program  is identified  by the  filetype  CMD.
When  you  enter  a  command  at  the  console,  the  operating  system  searches  on  disk
for  the  appropriate  CMD file, loads  it, and  initiates it. Concurrent CP/M-86  supports
three  different  execution  models  for  transient  programs:  the  8080  Model,  the  Small
Model,  and  the  Compact  Model.  Sections 4.1.1  through  4.1.3  describe these models
in  detail.

1-14

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

1.11  System Call Calling Conventions

1.11  System  Call  Calling  Conventions

I I. i

When  a  Concurrent  CP/M-86  process  makes  a  system call, it  loads  values  into  the
registers  shown  in  Table  1-1  and  initiates  Interrupt  224  (via the  INT  224  instruc-
tion),  reserved  by  the  Intel®  Corporation  for  this  purpose.

Table  1-1.  Registers Used  by System Calls

ENTRY  PARAMETERS

Register 

CL:  System Call Number
DL:  Byte Parameter

or
DX:  Word  Parameter
or

DX:  Address  -  Offset
DS:  Address  - Segment

RETURN  VALUES

Register 

AL:  Byte  Return

or

AX:  Word  Return

or

AX:  Address  -  Offset
ES:  Address  - Segment

BX:  Same  as  AX
CX:  Error  Code

Concurrent  CP/M-86 preserves  the  contents  of  registers  SI, DI, BP, SP, SS, DS,  and
CS  through  the  operating  system  calls.  The  ES  register  is  preserved  when  it  is  not
used  to  hold  a  return  segment  value.  Error  codes  returned  in  CX  are  shown  in
Table  6-5,  CX Error  Codes.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

1-15

1.12  SYSTAT:  System  Status 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

1.12  SYSTAT: System  Status 

i

The  SYSTAT  utility is a development tool  that  shows  the  internal state of  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86.  SYSTAT  describes  memory  allocation,  current  processes,  system queue
activity,  and  many  informative parameters  associated  with  these  system  data  struc-
tures.  Furthermore,  SYSTAT  presents  two  views:  either  a  static  snapshot  of system
activity,  or  a  continuous,  real-time window  into  Concurrent  CP/M-86.

You  can  specify  SYSTAT  in  one  of  two  modes.  If  you  know  which  display  you
want, you  can  specify  it  in the  invocation,  using an  option  shown  in the  menu below.
If  you  do  not  specify  an  option,  select  a  display from  this menu by typing

<cr>

The  screen  clears  and  the  main  menu  appears:

N h i ch  O p t i o n?

H ( e l p)
M ( e mo r x)
0 ( ue ru i eui)
P ( r o c e s s e s - A l l)
0 ( u e u es )
U ( s er  P r o c e s s e s)
E ( x it )

Press  the  appropriate  letter to  obtain  a display.

1-16

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

1.12  SYSTAT: System  Status

When  you  select  H(elp), the  HELP file demonstrates  the  proper  syntax  and  avail-

able  options:

To  use  SYSTAT  w i th  the  menu:  At  the  system  prompt  type  SYSTAT  <CR>

To  use  SYSTAT  w i t h o ut  the  menu:  At  the  system  p r o m pt  type  the  command

. 

-.  .., 

'•  t  :f'T

SYSTAT  [option]  - o r-
SYSTAT  [option  C]  -or-
SYSTAT  [option  C ««]

-whe re-

-> 

o p t i on  =
M ( e m o r y)  P(rocesses)  O ( v e r v i e w)
U(ser  Processes)  Q(ueues)  H(elp)

->  C  =  Continuous  d i s p l ay

««  =  1-2  d i b i ts  i n d i c a t i ng  the  p e r i o d*

in  seconds *  between  d i s p l ay  refreshes*

Type  any  l e t t er  to  r e t u rn  to  the  m e n u*

The  M,  P,  Q,  and  U  options  ask  you  if  you  prefer  a  continuous  display.  If  you
type  y,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  asks  for  a time interval, in seconds,  and  then  displays a
real-time  window  of  information.  If  you  type  n,  a  static  snapshot  of  the  requested
information  appears.  In either case,  press  any key to  return  to  the menu.

The  M(emory)  option  displays all memory potentially available to  you,  but  it does
not  display  restricted  memory.  The  partitions  are  listed  in  memory-address  order.
Length  parameter  is shown  in paragraph values.

The  P(rocess) option  displays all system processes  and  the resources  they are using.

The  Q(ueues) option  displays all system queues,  listing queue readers,  writers,  and

owners.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

.

1-17

1.12  SYSTAT: System Status 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  U(ser  Processes) option  displays only user-initiated processes  in  the  same for-

mat  as the  P(rocess) option.

The  O(verview)  option  displays an  overview of  the  system parameters, as  specified

at  system generation  time. The display is not  continuous.

The  E(xit)  option  returns you  to  system level  from  the menu, as does  CTRL-C.

End  of  Section 1

V  M l'

V lt

,  r>

1-18

m DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Section  2
The  Concurrent CP/M-86 File System

2.1  File  System  Overview

The  Basic Disk  Operating  System  (BDOS) file system supports  from  one  to  sixteen
logical  drives.  Each  logical  drive has  two  regions:  a  directory  area  and  a  data  area.
The  directory  area  defines  the files that  exist on  the  drive and  identifies  the  data  area
space  that  belongs  to  each  file.  The  data  area  contains  the  file  data  defined  by  the
directory.

The  directory  area consists of sixteen logically independent directories. These direc-
tories  are  identified  by  user  numbers 0 through  15. During execution,  a process  runs
with  a  system  parameter  called  the  user  number  set  to  a  single  value.  The  user
number  specifies  the  current active directories  for  all drives on  the  system. For  exam-
ple,  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  DIR  utility  displays only files within  a  directory  selected
by  the  current  user  number.

The  file  system  automatically  allocates  directory  and  data  area  space  when  a  process
creates  or  extends  a file, and  returns previously allocated  space  to  free  space when  a
process  deletes  or  truncates  a  file.  If  no  directory  or  data  space  is  available  for  a
requested  operation,  the  BDOS  returns  an  error  code  to  the  calling  process.  The
allocation  and  retrieval  of  directory  and  data  space  is  transparent  to  the  calling
process. As a result,  you  need not  be concerned  with directory  and drive organization
when  using the file system  calls.

An  eight-character  filename  and  a  three-character filetype field identify  each file in
a  directory.  Together,  these  fields  must  be  unique  for  each  file  within  a  directory.
However,  files  with  the  same filename and  filetype  can  reside  in  different  user  direc-
tories without  conflict. Processes  can also assign an eight-character  password  to  a file
to protect it  from  unauthorized  access.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

. 

.

2-1

2.1  File  System Overview 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

All  system  calls  that  involve file operations  specify  the  requested  file  by  filename
and  filetype.  For  some  system  calls,  multiple  files  can  be  specified  by  a  technique
called  ambiguous  reference.  This  technique  uses  question  marks  and  asterisks  as
wildcard  characters  to  give the file system a pattern  to  match as it searches a  directory.

The file system supports  two  categories  of  system  calls: file-access system calls  and
drive-related  system calls. The file-access system calls have mnemonics beginning with
F_,  and  the  drive-related  system  calls  have  mnemonics  beginning  with  DRV_.  The
next  two  sections  introduce  the file system calls.

2.1.1  File-access System Calls

Most  of  the file-access system  calls can  be divided  into  two  groups:  system  calls  that
operate  on files within  a  directory  and  system calls that  operate  on  records  within a
file. However,  the  file-access  category  also  includes  several  miscellaneous  functions
that  either  affect  the  execution  of other file-access system calls  or  are  commonly used
with  them.

System  calls  in  the  first  file-access  group  include  calls  to  search  for  one  or  more
files, delete  one  or  more  files,  rename  or  truncate  a  file,  set file attributes,  assign  a
password  to  a  file,  and  compute  the  size  of  a  file.  Also  included  in  this  group  are
system  calls to  open  a file, to  create  a file, and  to  close  a file.

The  second file-access group  includes  system  calls to  read  or  write  records  to  a file,
either  sequentially  or  randomly,  by  record  position.  BDOS  read  and  write  system
calls  transfer  data  in  128  byte  units,  which  is the  basic record  size of the  file  system.
This  group  also  includes system  calls  to  lock  and  unlock  records  and  thereby  allow
multiple  processes  to  coordinate  access  to  records  within a  commonly  accessed  file.

Before  making  read,  write,  lock,  or  unlock  system  calls  for  a  file,  you  must  first
open  or  create  the file. Creating  a file has  the  side effect  of opening the file for  record
access.  In  addition,  because  Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports  three  different  modes  of
opening  files  (Locked,  Unlocked,  and  Read-Only),  there  can  be  other  restrictions  on
system  calls in this group  that  are related  to  the open  mode.  For example, you  cannot
write  to  a file that you have  opened  in Read-Only  mode.

2-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.1  File System  Overview

After  a  process  has  opened  a file, access  to  the  file  by  other  processes  is restricted
until  the file is closed.  Again, the  exact  nature of  the  restrictions depends on  the  open
mode.  However,  in  all  cases  the  file  system  does  not  allow  a  process  to  delete,
rename,  or  change  a  file's  attributes if another  process  has  opened  the file. Thus,  the
close  system  call  performs  two  steps  to  terminate  record  access  to  a  file.  It  perma-
nently  records  the  current  status  of  the file in  the  directory  and  removes the  open-file
restrictions  limiting access  to  the file by other  processes.

The  miscellaneous file-access system calls include calls to  set the  current user num-
ber,  set  the  DMA  address,  parse  an  ASCII file  specification  and  set  a  default  pass-
word.  This  group  also  includes system  calls  to  set the  BDOS Multisector  Count  and
the  BDOS  Error  Mode.  The  BDOS  Multisector  count  determines the  number of  128-
byte  records  to  be  processed  by  the  read,  write,  lock,  and  unlock  system  calls.  The
Multisector  count  can  range  from  1  to  128;  the  default  value  is  one.  The  BDOS
Error  Mode  determines whether  the file system intercepts certain errors  or  returns on
all  errors  to  the  calling process.

2.1.2  Drive-related  System  Calls

BDOS  drive-related system  calls select the  default  drive, compute  a  drive's  free  space,
interrogate  drive  status,  and  assign  a  directory  label  to  a  drive.  A  drive's  directory
label  controls  whether  the file system enforces file password  protection  for files in  the
directory.  It  also  specifies whether  the file system  is to  perform date  and  time  stamp-
ing  of files on  the  drive.

This  category  also  includes  system  calls  to  reset  specified  drives  and  to  control
whether  other  processes  can  reset  particular  drives.  When  a  drive  is  reset,  the  next
operation  on  the  drive  reactivates  it  by  logging it  in.  Logging in  a  drive initializes  the
drive  for  directory  and  file  operations.  The  purpose  of  a  drive reset  call  is to  prepare
for  a  media  change  on  drives  that  support  removable  media.  Under  Concurrent
CP/M-86,  drive  reset  calls  are  conditional.  A  process  cannot  reset  a  drive  if  another
process  has  a file open  on  the  drive.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-3

2.1  File System  Overview

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  following  table  summarizes  the  BDOS file system calls.

Mnemonic

DRV  ACCESS
DRV  ALLOCVEC
DRV  ALLRESET
DRV  DPB
DRV  GET
DRV  GETLABEL
DRV  FLUSH
DRV  FREE
DRV  LOGINVEC
DRV  RESET
DRV  ROVEC
DRV  SETLABEL
DRV  SET
DRV  SETRO
DRV_SPACE

F  ATTRIB
F  CLOSE
F  DELETE
F  DMASEG
F  DMAGET
F  DMAOFF
F  ERRMODE
F  LOCK
F  MAKE
F  MULTISEC
F  OPEN
F  PARSE
F  PASSWD

Table 2-1.  File  System Calls

Description

Access Drive
Get  Drive Allocation  Vector
Reset  All Drives
Get  Disk  Parameter  Block Address
Get  Default  Drive
Get  Directory  Label
Flush  Data  Buffers
Free  Drive
Return  Drives Logged  In  Vector
Reset  Drive
Return  Drives R/O  Vector
Set  Directory  Label 
Set  (Select)  Drive
Set Drive  To  Read-Only
Get  Free  Space  On  Drive

• 

" 

• 

'

Set File's  Attributes
Close  File
Delete  File
Set DMA  Segment
Get  DMA  Address
Set DMA  Offset
Set BDOS Error  Mode

.  Lock  Record  In  File
Make A New  File
Set BDOS  Multisector  Count
Open  File
Parse Filename
Set Default  Password

2-4

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.1  File System Overview

Mnemonic 

F_RANDREC 
F_READ 
F_READRAND 
F_RENAME 
F_SIZE 
F_SFIRST 
F_SNEXT 
F_TIMEDATE 
FJTRUNCATE 
FJJNLOCK 
FJJSERNUM 
F_WRITE 
F_WRITERAND 
F_WRITEZF 
F  WRITEXFCB 

Table  2-1. 

(continued)

Description

Return  Record  Number For File Read-Write
Read  Record  Sequentially From File
Read  Random  Record  From File
Rename File
Compute  File  Size
Directory  Search First
Directory Search Next
Return  File Time/Date Stamps  Password  Mode
Truncate  File
Unlock Record  In  File
Set/Get  Directory  User Number
Write  Record  Sequentially Into  File
Write  Random  Record  Into File
Write  Random  Record  With Zero  Fill
Write  File's XFCB

The  following  sections  contain  information on  important  topics  related  to  the file
system.  Read  these  sections  carefully  before  attempting to  use  the  system calls described
individually  in  Section  6.

2.2  File  Naming  Conventions

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  a  file  specification  consists  of  four  parts:  a  drive
specifier,  the filename field, the filetype field, and  the file password  field.  The  general
format  for  a  command  line file specification is shown  below:

{d:}  filename  {.typ} {;password}

The  drive specifier  field  specifies  the  drive where the file is located.  The  filename  and
filetype  fields  identify  the  file.  The  password  field  specifies  the  password  if  a  file  is
password  protected.

DIGITAL RESEARCH ™

2-5

2.2  File  Naming Conventions

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  drive,  type,  and  password  fields  are  optional,  and  the  delimiters  :  .  ;  are
required  only when  specifying their  associated  fields.  The  drive specifier  can  be assigned
a  letter  from  A  to  P, where  the  actual  drive letters  supported  on  a  given system  are
determined  by  the  XIOS  implementation.  When  the  drive letter  is not  specified,  the
current  default  drive is assumed.

The filename and password fields can contain  one to eight  nondelimiter  characters.
The filetype field can  contain  one to  three nondelimiter characters. All three fields are
padded  with  blanks,  if  necessary.  Omitting  the  optional  type  or  password  fields
implies  a  ueld  specification of  all blanks.

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  P_CLI  system  call  interprets  ASCII  command
lines  and  loads  programs.  The  P_CLI  system  call  makes  F_PARSE system  calls  to
parse  file  specifications from  a  command  line.  F_PARSE recognizes  certain  ASCII
characters as delimiters when  it parses  a file specification. These  characters are  shown
in  Table  2-2.

T£ible  2-2.

Valid  Filename  Delimiters

ASCII

null
space
return
tab
*

B
•
=
,
[
]
<
>

1

Hex  Equivalent

OOOH
020H
OODH
009H
03AH
02EH
03BH
03DH
02CH
05BH
05DH
03CH
03EH
07CH

2-6

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.2  File Naming  Conventions

The  F_PARSE  system  call  also  excludes  all  control  characters  from  the  file  specifica-
tion fields and  translates all lower-case letters to  upper-case.

Avoid  using  parentheses  and  the  backslash  character,  \,  in  the  filename  and
filetype fields because  they  are  commonly  used  delimiters.  Use asterisk  and  question
mark  characters,  * and  ?, only  to  make  an  ambiguous file reference.  When  F_PARSE
encounters  an  asterisk  in  a filename or filetype field, it pads  the  remainder of  the field
with  question  marks.  For  example,  a filename of  X*.*  is parsed  to  X ? ? ? ? ? ? ? . ? ? ?.  The
BDOS  F_SFIRST,  F_SNEXT,  and  F_DELETE  system  calls match  a  question  mark  in
the  filename  or  filetype  fields  to  the  corresponding  position  of  any  directory  entry
belonging  to  the  current  user  number. Thus,  a  search  operation  f o r X ? ? ? ? ? ? ? . ? ?? finds
all  the files in  the  current  user  directory  beginning  in X. Most other file-access BDOS
system  calls  treat  the  presence  of  a  question  mark  in the filename or filetype fields as
an  error.

It  is not  mandatory  to  follow  the file naming conventions  of  Concurrent  CP/M-86
when  you  create  or  rename  a  file  with  BDOS  system  calls  directly  from  an  applica-
tion  program.  However,  the  conventions  must  be  used  if  the  file  is  to  be  accessed
from  a  command  line. For  example,  the  P_CLI  system  call  cannot  locate  a  command
file in  the  directory  if its  filename  or filetype field contains  a  lower-case  letter.

As  a  general  rule,  the  filetype  field  names  the  generic  category  of  a  particular  file,
and  the  filename  field  distinguishes  individual  files  within  each  category.  Although
they  are  generally  arbitrary,  Table  2-3  lists  some  of  the  generic  filetype  categories
that  have  been  established.

DIGITAL RESEARCH

2.2  File  Naming  Conventions

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Table 2-3.  Filetype  Conventions

Filetype

Description

A86
ASM
BAK
BAS
C
CMD
COM
CON
DAT
HEX
H86
INT
LIB
LST
PLI
PRL
REL
RSP
SPR
SUB
SUP
SYM
SYS

8086  Assembler Source
Assembler  Source
Text  or  Source Back-up
BASIC Source File
C  Source File
8086  Command  File
8080  Command  File
CCP/M-86  Modules
Data  File
HEX  Machine  Code
ASM86  HEX File
Intermediate  File
Library File
List  File
PL/I  Source File
Page  Relocatable
Relocatable  Module
Resident System Process
System  Page  Relocatable
SUBMIT File
Startup  File
Symbol File
System  File
Temporary  File

2.3  Disk  Drive  and File  Organization

The  file  system  can  support  up  to  sixteen  logical  drives,  identified by the  letters  A
through  P.  A  logical  drive  usually  corresponds  to  a  physical  drive  on  the  system,
particularly  for  physical  drives  that  support  removable  media  such  as  floppy  disks.
High-capacity  hard  disks,  however,  are  commonly  divided  up  into  multiple  logical
drives.  If  a  disk  contains  system  tracks  reserved  for  the  boot  loader,  these  tracks
precede  the  tracks  of  the  disk  mapped  by the  logical  drive. In this  manual, references
to  drives  means  logical  drives,  unless  explicitly  stated  otherwise.

2-8

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

2.3  Disk  Drive  and  File  Organization

The  maximum file size  supported  on  a  drive  is 32  megabytes. The  maximum capacity
of  a  drive  is  determined  by  the  data  block  size  specified  for  the  drive in  the  XIOS.
The  data  block size is the  basic unit in which the  BDOS allocates space to files. Table
2-4  displays the  relationship between  data  block  size and  total  drive capacity.

Table  2-4.

Drive  Capacity

Data  Block  Size

Maximum  Drive  Capacity

IK
2K
4K
8K
16K

256 kilobytes

64 megabytes
128 megabytes
256 megabytes
512 megabytes

Each  drive  is  divided  into  two  regions:  a  directory  area  and  a  data  area.  The
directory  area  contains  from  one  to  sixteen  blocks  located  at  the  beginning of  the
drive.  The  actual  number  is  set  in  the  XIOS.  Directory  entries  residing  in  this  area
define  the files that  exist  on  the  drive. In  addition,  the  directory entries belonging  to
a  file  identify  the  data  blocks  in  the  drive's  data  area  that  contain  the  file's  records.
The  directory  area  is logically subdivided into  sixteen  independent  directories  identi-
fied as user  0 through  15. Each  independent  directory  shares the  actual directory  area
on  the  drive.

Each  disk  file  consists  of  a  set of  up  to  262,144  (40000H)  128-byte  records.  Each
record  of  a  file  is  identified  by  its  position  in  the  file.  This  position  is  called  the
record's  Random  Record  Number.  If a file is created  sequentially, the first record  has
a  position  of  zero,  while  the  last  record  has  a  position  one  less  than  the  number  of
records  in  the  file.  Such  a file can  be  read  sequentially,  beginning  at  record  zero,  or
randomly  by  record  position.  Conversely,  if  a  file  is  created  randomly,  records  are
added  to  the  file  by  specified  position.  A  file  created  in  this  way  is  called  sparse  if
positions exist  within  the file where  a record  has not  been  written.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-9

2.3  Disk  Drive  and File  Organization 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  BDOS  automatically allocates  data  blocks to  a file to  contain the file's records
on  the  basis  of  the  record  positions  consumed.  Thus,  a  sparse file that  contains  two
records, one at position  zero,  the other at position 262,143, consumes  only two  data
blocks  in  the  data  area.  Sparse files can  only be  created  and  accessed randomly,  not
sequentially.  Note  that  any  data  block  allocated  to  a  file  is  permanently allocated
until  the file is deleted  or  truncated.  These  are the  only mechanisms supported  by the
BDOS  for  releasing data  blocks  belonging to  a file.

Source  files  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  are  treated  as  a  sequence  of  ASCII  char-
acters,  where  each  line  of  the  source  file  is  followed  by  a  carriage  return/line-feed
sequence,  ODH  followed  by  OAH.  Thus,  a  single  128-byte  record  could  contain
several  lines  of  source  text.  The  end  of  an  ASCII  file  is  denoted  by  a  CTRL-Z
character  (1AH),  or  a  real  end-of-file,  returned  by  the  BDOS read  system  call.  Note
that  these  source file conventions are  not  supported  in the file system directly but  are
followed  by  Concurrent  CP/M-86  utilities such as TYPE and  ASM-86™.  In addition,
CTRL-Z  characters  embedded  within  other  types  of files such  as  CMD  files  do  not
signal  end-of-file.

2.4  File Control  Block  Definition

The  File Control  Block (FCB) is a system data  structure that  serves as an important
channel  for  information  exchange  between  a  process  and  BDOS file-access system
calls.  A process  initializes an  FCB to  specify  the  drive location,  filename  and filetype
fields, and  other  information that  is required to  make a file-access call.  For example,
in  an  F_OPEN  system  call,  the  FCB specifies  the  name and  location  of  the file to  be
opened.  In  addition,  the  file  system  uses  the  FCB to  maintain  the  current  state  and
record  position  of  an  open  file.  Some file-access system calls use  special fields within
the  FCB  for  invoking options.  Other  file-access  system  calls  use  the  FCB  to  return 
data  to  the  calling program.  All BDOS  random  I/O  system calls require the  calling
process  to  specify  the  Random  Record  Number  in  a  3-byte  field  at  the  end  of  the
FCB.

*

2-10

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

2.4  File Control  Block  Definition

When  a  process  makes  a  BDOS file-access system call, it passes  an  FCB address  to
the  BDOS.  This  address  has two  16-bit  components:  register DX, which  contains  the
offset,  and  register  DS, which  contains  the  segment. The  length of the  FCB data  area
depends  on  the  BDOS  system  call.  For  most  system  calls,  the  minimum length  is  33
bytes.  For  the  F_READRAND,  F_WRITERAND,  F_WRITEZF,  F_LOCK,  F_UN-
LOCK,  F_RANDREC,  F_SIZE,  and  F_TRUNCATE  system calls, the  minimum FCB
length  is  36  bytes.  When  the  F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE  system  calls  open  a  file  in
Unlocked  mode,  the  FCB must  be at  least  35  bytes long.  Figure 2-1  displays the FCB
data  structure  in  two  formats.

DR 

NAME 

TYPE

00 

01

09 

OOH

DR

08H

F8

10H

DO 

18H

D8 

i

EX

12

F1

T1

D1

D9

CS 

R S 

RC 

DO- D15 

13 

14 

15 

16 

CR

32

RO 

33 

R 1 

34 

R2

35

I 

I 

1 

F2 

T2 

D2 

-t- 

1

F3 

T3

D3 

I

I!

1 

-1-

F5 

D5 

F4

EX

D4

1

I

F6

RS

D6

F7

RC

D7

D10 

D11 

D12

i 

•

D13 

D14 

^ 

| 

I

• 

^L

1

D15

. . - 'I

20H

CR 

RO 

R1

R2

Figure  2-1.  FCB - File Control Block

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-11

2.4  File  Control  Block  Definition

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The fields in the  FCB are  defined  as  follows:

Field

DR

Table 2-5.  FCB Field  Definitions

Definitions

Drive  Code  (0 -  16).

0  = >  use default  drive  for file
1  = >  auto  disk  select  drive A
2  = >  auto  disk  select  drive B

16 = >  auto  disk  select  drive P

F1...F8

T1,T2,T3

Contain  the filename in ASCII upper-case, with high bit  =  0. Fl',
...,  F8' denote  the high-order bit of these positions and are called
attribute  bits.

Contain  the filetype in ASCII upper-case, with high bit  =  0. Tl',
T2', and T3'  denote the high  bit of these  positions  and  are also
called  attribute  bits.

Tl'  =  1 =>  Read-Only  file,
T2'  =  1 = >  System  file,
T3'  =  1 =>  File has been  archived.

Contains  the current extent  number. This field is usually set to 0
by  the  calling process,  but  it can range  from  0 to  31  during file
I/O.

Contains  the  FCB checksum value for  open  FCBs.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

EX

CS

2-12

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.4  File Control  Block  Definition

Field 

RS 

RC 

DO...D15 

CR 

RO,R1,R2 

Table 2-5. 

(continued)

Definitions

Reserved  for  internal system use.

Record  count  for extent  EX. This field takes on values from  0  to
255  (values  greater  than  128  imply a  record  count  of  128).

Normally filled in by Concurrent  CP/M-86  and  reserved  for sys-
tem  use. Also used  to  specify  the  new filename and filetype with
the  F_RENAME  system call.

Current  record  to read or write in a sequential file operation.  This
field is  normally set  to  zero  by  the  calling process  when  a file is
opened  or  created.

Optional  Random  Record  Number  in  the  range  0-262,143
(0  -  3FFFFH).  RO, Rl,  R2  constitute  an  18-bit  value with  low
byte  RO, middle byte Rl,  and  high byte R2.

Note: 
successfully  opened  in Unlocked mode  (refer  to  Section 2.14).

the  2-byte  File  ID  is returned  in  bytes RO and  Rl  of  the  FCB when  a  file  is

2.4.1  FCB Initialization  and  Usage

The  calling  process  must  initialize  bytes  0  through  11 of  the  referenced FCB before
making  the  following  file-access  system  calls:  F_ATTRIB,  F_DELETE,  F_MAKE,
F_OPEN,  F_RENAME,  F_SFIRST,  F_SIZE,  F_SNEXT,  FJTIMEDATE,  F_TRUN-
CATE,  and  F_WRITEXFCB.  Normally,  the  DR  field  specifies  the  drive  location  of
the  file,  and  the  name  and  type fields specify  the  name of  the file. You must  also  set
the  EX  field  of  the  FCB before  calling F_MAKE,  F_OPEN,  F_SFIRST, and  F_WRI-
TEXFCB.  Except  for  the  F_WR1TEXFCB  system  call,  you  can  usually  set  this field
to  zero.  Note  that  the  F_RENAME  system call  requires the  calling process  to  place
the new filename and filetype in bytes Dl  through  Dll.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-13

2.4  File Control  Block  Definition 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  remaining file-access calls  that  use  FCBs require an  FCB that  has  been  initial-
ized  by a prior file-access system  call.  For example,  the F_SNEXT  system call expects
an  FCB  initialized  by  a  prior  F_SFIRST  call.  In  addition,  the  F_LOCK,  F_READ,
F_READRAND, FJJNLOCK, F_WRITERAND, and  F_WRITEZF system calls require
an  FCB that  has  been  activated  for  record  operations.  Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,
only  the  F_OPEN  and  F_MAKE  system calls can  activate an FCB.

If  you  intend  to  process  a file sequentially  from  the  beginning, using the  F_READ
and  F_WRITE  system  calls,  you  must  set byte 32  to  zero  before  you  make your first
read  or  write  call.  In  addition,  when  you  make  a  F_LOCK,  F_READRAND,  F_UN-
LOCK,  F_WRITERAND,  or  F_WRITEZF  system call,  you  must  set  bytes  RO through
R2  of  the  FCB to  the  requested  Random  Record  Number.  The  F_TRUNCATE  sys-
tem  calls also  requires the  FCB random  record field to  be initialized.

The  F_SFIRST,  F_SNEXT,  and  F_DELETE  system  calls  support  multiple  or
ambiguous  reference.  In  general,  a  question  mark  in  the  filename,  filetype,  or  EX
fields matches  all  values  in  the  corresponding  positions  of  directory  entries during  a
directory  search  operation.  File  directory  entries  maintained  in  the  directory  area of
each  disk  drive  have  the  same  format  as  FCBs except  for  byte 0,  which  contains  the
file's  user  number,  and  bytes  32  through  35,  which  are  not  present.  The  search
system  calls,  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT,  also  recognize  a  question  mark  in  the  FCB
DR  field,  and,  if  specified,  they  return  all  directory  entries  on  the  disk  regardless of
user  number,  including  empty  entries.  A  directory  FCB that  begins  with  E5H  is  an
empty  directory  entry.

When  the  F_OPEN  and  F_MAKE  system  calls activate  an  FCB for  record  opera-
tions, they  copy  the  FCB's  matching directory  entry  from  disk,  excluding byte 0,  into
the  FCB  in  memory.  In  addition,  these  system  calls  compute  and  store  a  checksum
value  in the  CS field of  the  FCB.  During subsequent  record  operations  on  the file, the
file system  uses  this  checksum  field  to  verify  that  the  FCB has  not  been  modified by
the  calling  process  in  an  illegal way.  Thus,  all  read,  write,  lock,  and  unlock  opera-
tions  on  a  file  must  specify  a  valid  activated  FCB;  otherwise,  the  BDOS  returns  a
checksum  error.  The  BDOS  performs  this  checking to  protect  the  integrity  of  the file
system.  In  general,  you  should  not  modify  bytes  0  through  31  of  an  open  FC3,
except  to  set  interface  attributes  (see  Section  2.4.3).  Other  restrictions  related  to
activated  FCBs  are  discussed  in  Section  2.10.

2-14

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.4  File  Control  Block  Definition

The  BDOS  updates  the  memory  copy  of the  FCB during file processing to maintain
the  current  position  within  the  file.  During  file  write  operations,  the  BDOS  also
updates  the  memory  copy  of  the  FCB to  record  the  allocation  of  data  blocks  to  the
file.  At  the  termination  of  file  processing,  the  F_CLOSE  system  call  permanently
records  this  information on  disk.

Note  that  the  BDOS  does  not  record  the  data  blocks  allocated  to  a  file  during
write  operations  in  the  disk  directory  until  the  calling  process  issues  an  F_CLOSE
call.  Therefore,  a  process  that  creates  or  modifies  files  must  close  the  files  at  the
termination  of file processing.  Otherwise,  data  might  be lost. 

. 

:

2.4.2  File  Attributes

The  high-order  bits  of  the  FCB filename (F1',...,F8')  and filetype fields (T1',T2',T3')
are  called  attribute  bits.  Attribute  bits  are  1-bit  Boolean fields, where  1 indicates  on
or  true,  and  0  indicates  off  or  false.  Attribute  bits  indicate  two  kinds  of  attributes
within  the  file  system:  file  attributes  and  interface  attributes.  The  file  attributes  are
described  in  this  section.  Section  2.4.3 describes  interface  attributes.

The file attribute  bits, F1',...,F4' and IT, T2', T3', indicate that  a file has a  defined
attribute.  These  bits  are  recorded  in  a file's directory  FCBs. File attributes  can  be set
or  reset  only  by  the  F_ATTRIB  system  call.  When  the  F_MAKE  system  call  creates
a  file,  it  initializes all  file  attributes  to  zero.  A  process  can  interrogate  file  attributes
in  an  FCB  activated  by  the  F_OPEN  system  call,  or  in  directory  FCBs  returned  by
the  F_SFIRST and  F_SNEXT system  calls.

Note: 
in  the  directory.

the file system  ignores  the file attribute  bits  when  it  attempts  to  locate  a file

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-15

2.4  File Control Block  Definition 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The file system defines file attributes Tl',T2',and T3' as  follows:

Table 2-6.  File Attribute  Definitions

Attribute 

Definition

Tl':  Read-Only  Attribute

This  attribute,  if set,  prevents  write  operations  to  a file.

T2':  System  Attribute

This  attribute,  if set,  identifies  the file as a Concurrent  CP/M-86
system file. The Concurrent  CP/M-86 DIR utility does not usually
display  System  files.  In  addition,  user-zero  system  files  can  be
accessed  on  a  Read-Only  basis  from  other  user numbers.

T3':  Archive  Attribute

User-written  archive programs  use this attribute. When  an archive
program  copies  a file to back-up storage, it sets the archive attrib-
ute  of  the  copied  files.  The file  system  automatically resets  the
archive  attribute  of a directory  entry when  writing to  the  direc-
tory  entry's  region  of  a  file.  An  archive  program  can  test  this
attribute in each of the file's directory entries using the F_SFIRST
and  F_SNEXT  system calls. If all directory  entries have the archive
attribute  set,  the  file  has  not  been  modified  since  the  previous
archive. The Concurrent  CP/M-86 PIP utility supports file archival.

File  attributes  FT through F4' of command files are defined as Compatibility  Attri-
butes  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  (see  Section  2.12).  However,  for  all  other  files,
attributes Fl'  through  F4'  are  available for definition  by the  user.

2-16

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

2.4  File  Control  Block  Definition

2.4.3 

Interface Attributes

The  interface  attributes  are F5', F6', F7', and F8'. These  attributes cannot  be used as
file attributes.  Interface  attributes  F5'  and  F6'  request  options  for  BDOS file-access
system  calls. Table  2-7  lists the  F5'  and  F6'  attribute definitions  for  the  system calls
that  define  interface attributes.  Note  that  the  F5'  =  0  and  F6'  =  0  definitions are
not  listed  if their  definition  simply implies the  absence of  the  option  associated  with
setting the  interface  attribute.

Table  2-7.  BDOS Interface Attributes F5' and F6'

System  Call

F_ATTRIB

F_CLOSE

F_DELETE

F_LOCK

F_MAKE

F_OPEN

Attribute

F5'  =
F6'  =

1
1

:  Maintain extended  file  lock
: Set file byte  count

F5'  =
F6'  =

1
1

:  Partial Close
:  Extend file lock

F5'  =

1

:  Delete file XFCBs only and
maintain  extended file lock

F5'  =
F5'  =
F6'  =
F6'  =

0
1
0
1

:  Exclusive Lock
:  Shared Lock
:  Lock existing records only
:  Lock  logical  records

F5'  =
F5'  =
F6'  =

0
1
1

:  Open  in Locked  mode
:  Open  in Unlocked mode
:  Assign password  to file

F5'  =
F5'  =
F6'  =
F6'  =

0
1
0
1

:  Open  in Locked  mode
:  Open  in Unlocked mode
:  Open  in mode  specified by F5'
:  Open  in Read-Only  mode

-

'

F_RENAME

F5'  =

1

:  Maintain extended file lock

FJTRUNCATE

F5'  =

1

:  Maintain extended file lock

F_UNLOCK

F5'  =

1

:  Unlock all locked  records

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-17

>-y

^

2.4  File  Control  Block  Definition 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Section  6  details  the  above  interface attribute  definitions  for  each  of  the  preceding
system  calls. Note that  the  BDOS  always resets  interface  attributes F5'  and F6' before
returning  to  the  calling  process.  Interface  attributes  F7'  and  F8'  are  reserved  for
internal  use by  the file  system.

i *

2.5  User  Number  Conventions

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  user  facility  divides  each  drive  directory  into  sixteen
logically  independent  directories,  designated  as user  0  through  user  15. Physically, all
user  directories  share  the  directory  area  of  a  drive.  In  most  other  aspects,  however,
they  are  independent.  For  example,  files  with  the  same  name  can  exist  on  different
user  numbers  of  the  same  drive with  no  conflict. However,  a single file cannot  extend
across  more  than  one  user  number.

Only  one  user  number  is active  for  a  specific  process  at  one  time.  For  this  process,
the  current  user  number  applies  to  all  drives  on  the  system.  Furthermore,  the  FCB
format  does  not  contain  a  field  that  can  override  the  current  user  number.  As  a
result,  all file and  directory  operations  reference  only directory entries associated  with
the  current  user  number.

It  is  possible  for  a  process  to  access  files  on  different  user  numbers by  setting  the
user number to the  file's  user number with the F_USERNUM system call before issuing
the  BDOS  call. However,  if a  process  attempts  to  read  or  write to  a  file  under a  user
number  different  from  the  user number that  was  active when  the  file  was  opened,  the
file  system  returns an  FCB checksum  error.

When  the  P_CLI  system  call  initiates  a  transient process  or  Resident  System  Process
(described  in  detail  in  Section  5),  it  sets  the  user  number  to  the  default  value  estab-
lished  by  the  process  issuing the  P_CLI  system  call.  The  sending  process  is  usually
the  TMP.  However,  the  sending  process  can  be  another  process,  such  as  a  transient
program  that  makes  a  P_CHAIN  call. A transient process  can change its user number
by  making  a  F_USERNUM  call.  Changing  the  user  number  in  this  way  does  not
affect  the  command  line  user  number  displayed by the  TMP.  Thus,  when  a  transient
process  that  has  changed  its  user  number  terminates,  the  TMP  restores  and  displays
the  original  user  number  in the  command  line prompt  when  it regains  control.

2-18

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

2.5  User Number Conventions

User  0 has  special  properties under  Concurrent  CP/M-86. The file system  automat-
ically  opens  files  listed  under  user  zero  but  requested  under  another  user  number if
the file is not  present  under  the  current  user  number,  and  if the file on  user  zero  has
the  system  attribute  (T2')  set.  This convention  allows  utilities,  including overlays  and
any  other  commonly  accessed  files,  to  reside  on  user  zero,  but  remain  available  to
other  users.  This  eliminates  the  need  to  copy  commonly  used  utilities  to  all  user
numbers  on  a  directory,  and  gives  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  user  control  over  which
files  are  accessible to  the  different  user  areas.

2.6  Directory  Labels and XFCBs

The  file  system  includes  three  special  types  of  FCBs:  the  directory  label  and  the

XFCB,  described  in this  section,  and  the  SFCB, described  in detail  in Section  2.8.

The  directory  label  specifies  for  its  drive  whether  password  support  is to  be  acti-
vated,  and  if  date  and  time  stamping  for files is to  be performed. The  format  of  the
directory  label is shown  below  in  Figure  2-2.

DR

NAME

TYPE

DL S1 S2 RC

PASSWORD

TS1

TS2

00 

01...

09... 

12  13  14  15

16...

25.

29.

Figure 2-2.  Directory  Label Format

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-19

2.6  Directory  Labels and XFCBs

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Table  2-8.  Directory Label Field  Definitions

Field

DR

Name

Type

DL

Definition

drive code  (0 -  16)

directory  label name

directory  label type

directory  label data  byte

Bit  7  - enable password  support
Bit  6 - perform access time stamping
Bit 5  - perform update time stamping
Bit 4  - perform create time stamping
Bit  0  - Directory  Label exists
(Bit references are  right to  left,  relative to  0)

S1,S2,RC

reserved  for  future  use

Password

8-byte  password  field  (encrypted)

TS1

TS2

4-byte  creation  time stamp field

4-byte  update  time  stamp field

Only  one  directory  label  can  exist  in  a  drive's  directory  area.  The  directory  label
name  and  type fields are  not  used  to  search  for a directory  label; they can be used  to
identify  a  disk.

2-20

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

2.6  Directory  Labels and  XFCBs

You  can  use the  DRV_SETLABEL  system  call to  create  a directory  label or  update
its  fields.  This  system  call  can  also  assign  a  password  to  a  directory  label.  The
directory  label password,  if assigned,  cannot  be  circumvented, whereas  file  password
protection  on  a  drive  is an  option  controlled  by the  directory  label.  Thus,  access  to
the  directory  label  password  provides  the  ability  to  bypass  password  protection  on
the  drive.

Note: 
the  file  system  provides  no  specific  system  call  to  read  the  directory  label
FCB  directly.  However,  you  can  read  the  directory  label  data  byte  directly  with  the
BDOS  system  call,  DRV_GETLABEL.  In  addition,  you  can  use  the  BDOS  search
system  calls  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  to  find  a  directory  label. You  can  identify  the
directory  label  by  a value of  32  (020H)  in  byte 0  of  the  directory FCB.

The  XFCB  is  an  extended  FCB that  can  optionally  be  associated  with  a file in  the
directory.  If present,  it  contains  the file's password  and  password  mode.  The  format
of  the  XFCB  is shown  below  in  Figure  2-3.

DR

FILE

TYPE

PM S1 S2 RC

PASSWORD

00 

01 

09. 

12  13  14 

15 

16 

1
RESERVED
i

25 

29

Figure  2-3.  XFCB  - Extended  File Control  Block

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-21

2.6  Directory  Labels and XFCBs

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  fields  in the  XFCB  are  defined in Table  2-9:

Field

DR

File

Type

PM

Table 2-9.  XFCB Field Definitions

Definition

drive code  (0 -  16)

filename field

filetype field

password  mode

Bit  7 - Read  mode
Bit 6 - Write  mode
Bit 5  - Delete  mode
(Bit  references  are  right to  left,  relative to  0)

S1,S2,RC

reserved  for  system use

Password

8-byte password field (encrypted)

Reserved

8-byte area  reserved  for  future  use

An  XFCB  can  only  be  created  on  a  drive that  has  a  directory  label,  and  only if the
directory  label  enables  password  protection.  For  drives in  this  state,  there  are  two
ways  to  create  an  XFCB  for  a  file:  with  the  F_MAKE  system  call  or  the  F_WRI-
TEXFCB  system  call. The  F_MAKE  system call  creates  an  XFCB if the  calling process
requests  that  a password  be assigned  to  the  created file. The  F_WRITEXFCB system
call  creates  an  XFCB when  it  is called  to  assign a  password  to  an  existing file. You
can  identify  an  XFCB in  the  directory  by  a  value  of  16  (010H) + N  in  byte 0  of  the
FCB, where  N  equals the  user number.

2-22

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

2.7  File  Passwords

2.7  File  Passwords

There  are  two  ways  to  assign  passwords  to  a file: by the  F_MAKE  system  call  or
by  the  F_WRITEXFCB  system  call.  You  can  also  change  a  file's  password  or  pass-
word  mode  with  the  F_WRITEXFCB  system  call  if  you  can  supply  the  original
password.  Note that  you  cannot  change  a file's password  or  password  mode  if pass-
word  protection  for  the  drive is disabled by  the  directory  label. However,  even if you
cannot  supply  a  file's  password,  you  can  delete  a  file's  XFCB,  thereby  removing  its
password protection, if password  protection  is disabled  on  the  drive.

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  BDOS  provides  password  protection  in  one  of  three
modes  when  password  support  is  enabled  by  the  directory  label. Table  2-10  shows
the  difference  in  access  level  allowed  to  BDOS system calls when the  password  is  not
supplied.

Table  2-10.  Password Protection  Modes

Mode

Access  Level  Allowed  Without  Password

Read

Write

Cannot  be read,  modified, or  deleted.

Can  be read,  but  not  modified  or  deleted.

Delete

Can  be read and  modified, but  not deleted.

(1)

(2)

(3)

If  a file is password  protected  in  Read  mode,  a  process  must supply the  password  to
open  the  file.  Processes  cannot  write  to  a file protected  in  Write  mode  without  the
password.  A file protected  in Delete mode  allows read  and  write access, but  a process
must  specify  the  password  to  delete or  truncate the file, rename the file, or  to  modify
the  file's  attributes.  Thus,  password  protection  in  mode  1  implies  mode  2  and  3
protection,  and  mode  2  protection  implies  mode  3  protection.  All three  modes  require
the  user  to  specify  the  password  to  delete  or  truncate the file, rename the file, or  to
modify  the file's attributes.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-23

2.7  File  Passwords 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

If  a  process  supplies the  correct  password  or  the  directory  label disables  password
protection,  then  access  to  the  BDOS  system  calls is the  same  as  for  a file that  is  not
password-protected.  In  addition,  the  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls  are  not
affected  by file passwords.  The  following BDOS system calls test  for  passwords.

DRV_SETLABEL
F_ATTRIB
F_DELETE
F_OPEN
F_RENAME
F_WRITEXFCB
FJTRUNCATE

The  BDOS  maintains file passwords  in  the  XFCB and  directory label in  encrypted
form.  To  make  a  BDOS  system  call  for  a  file  that  requires  a  password,  a  process
must  place  the  password  in  the  first  eight  bytes of  the  current  DMA,  or  make  it  the
default  password  with  the  F_PASSWD  system  call,  before making  the  system  call.

the  BDOS  maintains  the  assigned  default  password  for  each  process.  Processes
Note: 
inherit  the  default  password  of  their  parent  process.  You  can  set  a  given  TMP's
default  password  using the  SET command;  all programs  loaded  by  this TMP  inherit
the  same  default  password.

2.8  File Date  and Time  Stamps: SFCBs

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  file  system  uses  a  special  type  of  directory  entry  called
an  SFCB to  record  date  and  time  stamps  for files. When  a  directory  has  been initial-
ized  for  date  and  time  stamping,  SFCBs  reside  in  every  fourth  position  of  the  direc-
tory.  Each  SFCB maintains the  date  and  time stamps  for the  previous three  directory
entries, as  shown  in Figure  2-4.

2-24

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

2.8  File Date and Time Stamps: SFCBs

FCB  1

FCB2

FCB 3

21

STAMPS 
FOR  FCB  1 

STAMPS 
FOR  FCB  2 

STA
FOR

MPS 
-CB 3 

//
//

BYTE  # 

0

11

21

31  32

Figure  2-4.  Directory  Record  with SFCB

This  figure  shows  a  128-byte  directory  record  containing  an  SFCB.  Directory  rec-
ords  have  four  directory  entries,  each  32  bytes  long;  SFCBs always occupy  the  last
32-byte  entry  in  the  directory  record.

The  SFCB  itself  contains  five  fields.  The  first  field  is  a  single byte  containing  the
value  021H;  this field identifies  the  SFCB within  the  directory.  The  next  three fields,
called  the  SFCB subfields,  are  each  10  bytes  in  length  and  contain  the  date  and  time
stamps  for  their  corresponding  FCB entries  in  the  directory  record.  The  last  byte of
the  SFCB is reserved  for  system  use. Figure 2-5  shows  the  detail of the  SFCB subfields.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-25

2.8  File  Date and Time  Stamps: SFCBs

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

CREATE/ACCESS
TIME AND  DATE

UPDATE
TIME  AND DATE

PASSWORD
MODE

RESERVED

BYTE  #  0

10

Figure  2-5.  SFCB  Subfields

An  SFCB  subfield  only  contains  valid  information  if  its  corresponding  FCB  in  the
directory  record  is  an  extent  zero  FCB.  This  FCB  is  a  file's  first  directory  entry.  For
password  protected  files,  the  SFCB  subfield  also  contains  the  password  mode  of  the
file; the  password  mode  field  is  zero  for files without  password  protection.  You  can
read  SFCBs  by  making  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls. In  addition,  you  can
make  a F_TIMEDATE  system  call to  retrieve the  date  and  time stamps  and  password
mode  of  a  specified  file.  Refer  to  the  T_GET  system  call  definition in  Section  6  for
the  description  of  the  format of  a  date  and  time  stamp field.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports  three  kinds  of  file  stamping:  create,  access,  and
update.  Create  stamps  record  when  the file was  created,  access  stamps  record  when
the file was  last  opened,  and  update  stamps  record  the last time the file was modified.
Create  and  access  stamps  share  the  same  field.  As  a  result,  file  access  stamps  over-
write  any  create  stamps.

2-26

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.8  File  Date  and Time Stamps:  SFCBs

The  directory  label  of  a  properly  initialized  disk  determines the  type  of  date  and
time  stamping  for  files  on  the  drive.  The  1NITDIR  utility  initializes  a  directory  for
date  and  time  stamping  by  placing  an  SFCB  in  every  fourth  directory entry. Disks
not  initialized  in  this  way  cannot  support  date  and  time stamping. In  addition, date
and  time  stamping is not  performed if the  disk's directory label  is absent or  does  not
specify  date  and  time stamping,  or  if the  disk  is Read-Only.

Note  that  the  directory  label  is also  time  stamped,  but  these stamps  are  not  made
in  an  SFCB; time stamp fields in  the  last  eight  bytes  of  the  directory label  show when
it  was  created  and  last  updated.  Access  stamping  is  not  supported  for  directory
labels.

The  BDOS  file  system  uses  the  system  date  and  time  when  it  records  a  date  and
time  stamp.  This  value  is  maintained in  a  field  in  the  SYSDAT part  of  the  System
Data  Segment. The  DATE  utility  sets  the  system  time and  date  (refer  to  the  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86  User's  Guide  for  details of  using DATE).

2.9  File  Open  Modes

The  file  system  provides  three  different  modes  for  opening files. They  are  defined

below. 

Locked  Mode 

, 

•  •  : 

i

•*

,

A  process  can  open  a  file  in  Locked  mode  only  if  the  file  is  not  currently opened
by  another  process.  Once  open  in  Locked  mode,  no  other  process  can  open  the file
until  it  is  closed.  Thus,  if  a  process  successfully  opens  a  file  in  Locked  mode,  that
process  owns  the file until the file is closed  or  the  process  terminates. Files opened  in
Locked  mode  support  read  and  write  operations  unless the  file  is  a  Read-Only file
(attribute Tl'  set)  or  the file is  password-protected  in  Write  mode,  and  the  process
issuing  the  F_OPEN  call  cannot  supply  the  password.  In  both  of  these  cases,  the
BDOS  allows  only  read  operations  to  the file.

Note:  Locked  mode  is  the  Default  mode  for  opening  files  under  Concurrent
CP/ M-86.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-27

2.9  File Open Modes 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

Unlocked  Mode

A  process  can  open  a  file  in  Unlocked  mode  if the  file  is not  currently open,  or if
another  process  has  already  opened  the  file  in  Unlocked  mode.  This  mode  allows
more  than  one process  to  open  the  same file. Files opened  in Unlocked mode  support
read  and  write  operations  unless  the file is a  Read-Only file (attribute Tl'  set) or  the
file is  password-protected 
in  Write  mode  and  the  process  issuing  the  F_OPEN  call
cannot  supply  the password.

When  opening  a file in Unlocked  mode,  a process must  reserve 35  bytes in the FCB
because  the  F_OPEN  system  call  returns  a  2-byte  value  called  the  File  ID  in  the RO
and  Rl  bytes  of  the  FCB.  The  File ID  is  a  required  parameter for  the  F_LOCK  and
F_UNLOCK  system  calls.  These  BDOS  system  calls  work  only  for  files  opened  in
Unlocked  mode.

Read-Only  Mode

A  process  can  open  a file in  Read-Only mode  if the file is not  currently opened  by
another  process  or  if  another  process  has  opened  the  file  in  Read-Only mode.  This
mode  allows  more  than  one  process  to  open  the  same file for  Read-Only access.

The  F_OPEN  system  call  performs the  following  steps  for files opened  in  Locked
or  Read-Only  mode.  If the  current  user  number  is nonzero,  and  the file to  be  opened
does  not  exist  under  the  current  user  number, the  F_OPEN  system call  searches  the
user  zero  directory  for  the  file.  If  the file exists  under  user  zero  and  has  the  system
attribute  T2'  set,  the  BDOS  opens  the file under  user  zero.  The  open  mode  is  auto-
matically  forced  to  Read-Only  when  this  is done.

The  F_OPEN  system  call  also  performs  the  following  action  for  files  opened  in
Locked  mode  when  the  current  user  number is zero.  If the file exists under user  zero
and  has  the  system T2'  and  Read-Only  (Tl')  attributes set,  the  open  mode  is  auto-
matically  set  to  Read-Only.  The  Read-Only  attribute  controls  whether  a  user-zero
process  and  processes  on  other  user  numbers  can  concurrently  open  a  user-zero
system file when  each  process  opens  the file in the  default  Locked  mode.  If the  Read-
Only  attribute  is  set,  all  processes  open  the  file  in  Read-Only  mode  and  the  BDOS
allows  concurrent  access  of  the file. However, if the  Read-Only  attribute  is reset,  the
user-zero  process  opens  the  file  in  Locked  mode.  This  prevents  sharing the file with
other processes.

2-28

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.9  File  Open Modes

The  F_OPEN  and  F_MAKE  system  calls use FCB interface attributes  F5'  and  F6'
to  specify  the  open  mode.  The  interface  attribute  definitions for  these  functions  are
listed in Table  2-7.

Note: 

the  F_MAKE  system  call does  not  allow  opening the file in Read-Only  mode.

2.10  File Security 
i

9

In  general,  the  security  measures  implemente  f 

the file system prevent  accidental
collisions  between  running processes.  It is not  possible to  provide  total  security under
Concurrent  CP/M-86  because  the file system  maintains file allocation  information in
open  FCBs  in  the  user's  memory  region,  and  Concurrent  CP/M-86  does  not  require
memory  protection.  However,  the  file  system  is  designed  to  ensure  that  multiple
processes  can  share  the  same file system without  interfering with  each  other  by

•  performing  checksum  verification of open  FCBs.
•  monitoring  all open files and locked  records  via the system  Lock  List.

The  BDOS  validates  the  checksum  of  user  FCBs before  all  I/O  operations  to  pro-
tect  the  integrity of  the file system from  corrupted  FCBs. The  F_OPEN  and F_MAKE
system  calls compute  and  assign checksums to  FCBs. The F_READRAND,  F_READ,
F_WRITERAND,  F_WRITEZF,  F_WRITE, F_LOCK, and  F_UNLOCK  system calls
subsequently  verify  and Recompute  the  checksums  when  they  change  the  FCB.  The
F_CLOSE  system  call  also  verifies  FCB  checksums.  Note  that  FCB  verification  by
these  system  calls  can  be  disabled  (see Section  2.12),  but  Concurrent  CP/M-86's  file
security  is reduced  when  this is done.  If the  BDOS detects  an  FCB checksum error,  it
does  not  perform  the  requested  command.  Instead,  it  either  returns  to  the  calling
process  with  an  error  code,  or  if  the  system  call  is  F_CLOSE  and  the  BDOS  Error
mode  is in  the  default  state  (see  Section  2.18),  it  terminates  the  calling  process  with
an  error  message.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-29

2.10  File  Security 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Concurrent  CP/M-86  uses a  system data  structure, called the  Lock  List,  to  manage
file opening  and  record  locking  by  running processes.  Each  time  a  process  opens  a
file or  locks  a  record  successfully,  the  file  system  allocates  an  entry  in  the  system
Lock  List to  record  the  fact. The file system uses the  following  information to

•  prevent  a  process  from  deleting, truncating,  renaming, or  updating  the attri-

butes  of  another  process's  open file.

•  prevent  a  process  from  opening  a file currently opened  by  another  process,

unless  both  processes  open  the file in unlocked or  Read-Only  mode.

•  prevent  a  process  from  resetting  a  drive  on  which  another  process  has  an

open file.

•  prevent  a process  from  reading, writing, or  locking a record  currently locked
by  another  process.  Refer  to  Section  2.14  for  more  information  on  record
locking  and  unlocking.

The  file  system only  verifies  whether  another  process  has  the  FCB-specified  file  open
for  the  following file-access system calls:  F_OPEN,  F_MAKE,  F_DELETE,  F_REN-
AME,  F_ATTRIB,  and  F_TRUNCATE.  For file-access system  calls  that  require  an
open  FCB,  the  FCB checksum controls  whether  the  calling  process  can  use  the  FCB.
By  definition,  a valid FCB checksum implies that  the file has  been successfully  opened
and  an  entry  for  the file resides  in the  system  Lock  List.

The  most  common  way  a process  releases a lock  entry for  an  open file is by closing
the file. A close  operation  is permanent  if it causes  the  removal  of the file's open  lock
list  entry.  The  file  system  invalidates  the  FCB  checksum  field  on  permanent  close
operations  to  prevent  continued  open file operations  with  the FCB.

However,  not  all  close  operations  are  permanent.  For  example,  if a  process  makes 
multiple F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE calls to  an open file, a matching number of F_CLOSE
calls  must  be  made  before  the  file  system  permanently closes  the  file.  Of  course,  if
you  only  open  a  file  once,  a  single  close  operation  permanently  closes  the  file.  In
addition,  a  process  can  optionally  make  partial  F_CLOSE  calls  to  a  file  by  setting
interface  attribute  F5'.  A  partial  close  operation  does  not  affect  the  open  state  of  a
file.  In  the  above  example,  a  partial  close  operation  would  not  count  against  an
F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE  call.  A partial  close  operation  simply updates  the  directory  to
reflect  the  current  state  of  the file.

j

2-30

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.10  File Security

V^

As  a  general  rule,  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  a  process  should  close files as  soon
as  it  no  longer  needs  them,  even  if it  has  not  modified  them.  While  a  process  has  a
file  open,  access  by  other  processes  to  the  file  is  restricted.  For  example,  after  a
process  has  opened  a file in  Locked  mode,  the file cannot  be opened  by other  processes
until  the file is closed  or  the  process  terminates.

Furthermore, space  in the  system  Lock  List is limited.  If a process  attempts to  open
a  file  and  no  space  remains  in  the  system  Lock  List,  or  if  the  process  exceeds  the
open  file  limit,  the  BDOS  denies  the  open  request  and  usually  terminates the  calling
process.  You  can  change  the  way  the  file  system  handles  this  error  by  making  a
F_ERRMODE  system call. Note that  the  size of the  system Lock  List  and  the  process
;  ,  ^
open file  limit  are  GENCCPM  parameters. 

There  are  several  other  situations  where  the  file  system  removes  open  file  entries
from  the  system  Lock  List  for  a  process.  For  example,  if  a  process  makes  a  F_DE-
LETE  call  for  a file it  has  open  in  Locked  mode,  the file  system  deletes  the  file  and
also  purges  the  file's  entry  from  the  system  Lock  List.  Deleting  an  open  file  is  not
recommended  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  but  it  is  supported  for  files  opened  in
Locked  mode  to  provide  compatibility with  software  written  under earlier releases of
MP/M™  and  CP/M.  The  file  system  does  not  allow  deletion  of  a  file  opened  in
Unlocked  or  Read-Only  mode.

To  ensure that  the  process  does  not  use the open  FCB corresponding  to  the  deleted
file,  the  file  system  subsequently  checks  all  open  FCBs  for  the  process.  Each  open
FCB is checked  the  next  time  it  is used  with  a file-access system  call that  requires  an
open  FCB.  If  a  Lock  List  entry  exists  for  the file, the  BDOS allows  the  operation  to
proceed;  if  not,  it  indicates  that  the file has  been  purged  and  the file system  returns
an  FCB checksum  error.

The  file  system  performs  this  verification  of  a  process's  open  FCBs  whenever  it
purges  an  open  file  entry  from  the  system  Lock  List.  The  following  list  describes
these  situations:

•  A process  makes  a F_ATTRIB,  F_DELETE,  F_RENAME,  or F_TRUNCATE
system  call  to  a file it  has  open  in  Locked  mode.  These  operations  cannot  be
performed  on  a file open  in  Unlocked or  Read-Only mode.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

.

2-31

2.10  File  Security 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

•  A process  issues  a DRV_FREE call for a drive on which  it has an open file.

•  The BDOS  detects  a change  in media  on a drive that  has open files. This  is a
special  case  because  a  process  cannot  control  the  occurrence of  this situation,
and  because  it  can  impact  more  than  one  process.  Refer  to  Section  2.17  for
more  details  on  this  situation.

Open  FCB  verification  can  affect  performance because  each  verification  operation
requires  a  directory  search  operation.  In  general,  you  should  avoid  such situations
when  creating  new  programs  for  Concurrent  CP/M-86.

2.11  Extended  File Locking

Extended  file  locking  enables  a  Concurrent  CP/M-86  process  to  maintain a  lock
on  a  file  after  the  file  is permanently closed.  This  facility  allows  a  process  to  set  the
attributes,  delete,  rename,  or  truncate  a file without  interference from  other  processes.
In  addition,  this  technique  avoids  the  problems  associated  with  using  these  system
calls  on  open  files  (see Section 2.10).

A  process  can  also  reopen  a  file  with  an  extended  lock  and  continue  open  file
processing.  To  illustrate how  extended file locking might be used,  a process  can  close
an  open file, rename  the file, reopen  the file under  its new  name,  and  continue  with
file operations  without  ever losing  the file's Lock  List item  and  control  over  the file.

A  process  can  only  specify  extended  file  locking  for  a file it  has  opened  in  Locked
mode.  To  extend  a  file's  lock,  set  interface attribute  F6'  when  closing the  file.  The
F_CLOSE  system  call  interrogates  this  attribute  only  when  it  is closing  a file perma-
nently.  Thus,  interface  attribute  F5',  signifying  a  partial  close,  must  be  reset  when
the  F_CLOSE  call  is  made.  In  addition,  the  close  operation  must  be permanent.  If a
process has  opened  a file N  times,  the F_CLOSE  system  call  ignores the F6'  attribute
until  the file is closed  for  the  Nth  time.

Note that  the  access  rules  for  a file with  an extended  lock  are identical  to the  rules

for  a file open  in  Locked  mode.

2-32

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.11  Extended  File  Locking

To  maintain  an  extended  file  lock  through  a  F_ATTRIB,  F_RENAME,  or
F_TRUNCATE  system  call,  set  interface  attribute F5'  of  the  referenced FCB when
making  the  call.  The  BDOS honors  this attribute only if the file has  been closed  with
an  extended  lock.  Setting  attribute  F5'  also  maintains an  extended  file  lock  for  the
F_DELETE  system call, but  setting this attribute also changes the  nature of the delete
operation  to  an  XFCB-only  delete.  If  successful,  all  four  of  these  system calls  delete
a  file's  extended  lock  item  if  they  are  called  with  attribute  F5'  reset.  However,  the
extended  lock  item  is not  deleted  if they return with  an  error  code.

You  can  make  a  F_OPEN  call  to  resume  record  operations  on  a  file  with  an
extended  lock.  Note  that  you  can  also  change  the  open  mode  when  you  reopen  the
file. The  following example  illustrates the  use of  extended  locks.

1.  Open  file  EXLOCK.TST  in  Locked  mode.

2.  Perform  read  and  write  operations  on  the file EXLOCK.TST  using the  open

FCB.

3.  Close  file  EXLOCK.TST  with  interface  attribute  F6'  set  to  retain  the  file's

lock  item.

4.  Use  the  F_RENAME  system  call  to  change  the  name  of  the  file  to
EXLOCK.NEW  with  interface attribute  F5'  set  to  retain  the  file's  extended
lock  item.

5.  Reopen  the file EXLOCK.NEW  in Locked  mode.

6.  Perform read  and write operations  on the file EXLOCK.NEW,  using the open

FCB.

7.  Close file EXLOCK.NEW  again  with  interface attribute  F6'  set to  retain  the

file's lock  item.

8.  Set  the  Read-Only  attribute  and  release  the  file's  lock  item  by  making  a

F_ATTRIB system  call  with  interface attribute  F5' reset.

At  this  point,  the  file  EXLOCK.NEW  becomes  available  for  access  by  another

process.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-33

2.12  Compatibility Attributes 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

2.12  Compatibility Attributes

Compatibility  attributes  provide  a  mechanism  to  modify  some  of  the  Concurrent
CP/M-86 file security  rules  for  specific  command files. Concurrent  CP/M-86  includes
this  facility  because  some  programs  developed  under  earlier Digital  Research  operat-
ing  systems  do  not  run  properly  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  Most  of  the  problems
encountered  by  these  programs  occur  because  they  were  designed  for  single-tasking
operating  systems  where file security  is not  required.  For  example,  a  program  might
close  a  file  and  then  continue  reading  and  writing  to  the file. Under  CP/M-86,  this
does  not  cause  a  problem.  However,  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  file  system
intercepts  open  file  operations  with  a  deactivated  FCB to  ensure  the  integrity of  the
file  system.  With  compatibility  attributes,  you  have  a  tool  for  dealing  with  these
kinds  of  situations.

You  should  only  use compatibility  attributes with  existing programs  that  run  prop-
erly  under  CP/M  or  CP/M-86.  Do  not  use  compatibility  attributes  with  new  pro-
grams  you  develop  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.

Compatibility  attributes  are  defined  as file attributes  FT  through  F4'  of  program
(CMD)  files.  You  can  use  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  SET utility  to  set these file attri-
butes  from  the  command  line.  However,  setting  a  command file's compatibility attri-
butes  has  no  affect  unless the  GENCCPM  COMPATMODE  option  has  been selected
during  system  generation.  If  this  has  been  done,  the  P_CLI  system  call  interrogates
file  attributes  FT  through  F4'  of  the  command  file  during  program  loading  and
modifies  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86 file security  rules for the  loaded  program.

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  BDOS  defines  the  compatibility  attributes  as  shown  in

Table 2-11.

2-34

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.12  Compatibility Attributes

Table  2-11.  Compatibility Attribute Definitions

Attribute 

Definition

Fl'  Modify  the  rules for  Locked  mode.

When a process running with FT set opens a file in Locked mode,
it  can  perform read  and  write operations to  the file as normal.
However,  to  other  processes  on  the  system,  it  appears  as if  the
file was opened  in Read-Only mode. Thus, another process run-
ning  with  Fl'  set,  can  open  the  same file in  Locked  mode  and
also perform write operations to the file. In addition, if a process
with Fl' reset  attempts  to open  the file in Locked or Read-Only
mode,  the  open  attempt  is allowed but  the  open  mode  is forced
to  Read-Only.  Furthermore,  write  operations  are  not  allowed
when  the process has Fl'  reset.

This  compatibility mode  is designed to  allow multiple copies of
the same program to run concurrently, even though the program
might  make  read  and  write  calls  to  a  common  file  that  it  has
opened  in  Locked  mode.  In  addition,  this  compatibility mode
allows other  programs  not  in this compatibility mode  to  access
the  file  on  a  Read-Only basis.  Note  that  record  locking is  not
supported  for  this modified  open  mode.  In addition, to  be  safe,
make  all static files such as program  and  help files Read-Only if
you  use this compatibility attribute.

There  is an  alternative  to  using this attribute if a  program only
makes  read  calls  to  the  common  file.  By placing the file under
User 0 with the  SYS and  Read-Only attributes set, you  force  the
open mode to Read-Only when the file is opened in Locked mode.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-35

2.12  Compatibility Attributes

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Table  2-11. 

(continued)

Attribute

Definition

F2'  Change F_CLOSE to  partial  close.

Processes  running  with  F2'  set,  only  make  partial  F_CLOSE
system  calls.  This  attribute  is intended for  programs  that  close
a file to  update  the directory  but  continue to use the file. A side
effect  of  this  attribute  is that files opened  by  a  process  are  not
released  from  the  system Lock  List until the process  terminates.
When using this attribute, it might be necessary to set the system
Lock  List parameters to  higher values when you generate a sys-
tem with  GENCCPM.

F3' Ignore close checksum  errors.

This attribute changes the way the F_CLOSE system call handles
Close Checksum errors. Normally, the file system prints an error
message on the console and terminates the calling process.  How-
ever, if this attribute  is set, the F_CLOSE system call ignores  the
checksum error  and performs the close operation.  This  interface
attribute  is  intended  for  programs  that  modify  an  open  FCB
before  closing a file.

F4' Disable  FCB Checksum verification  for  read  and  write  operations.

Setting this  attribute  also sets attributes  F2' and F3'. This  attri-
bute  is  intended  for  programs  that  modify  open  FCBs during
read  and  write operations.  Use this attribute very carefully,  and
only with software known to work, because it effectively disables
Concurrent  CP/M-86's file security.

2-36

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.12  Compatibility Attributes

Use the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  SET utility to  specify  the  combination  of  compatibil-

ity  attributes  you  want  set in  the  program's  command file. For  example,

filespec  [fl=on]
A>SE7 filespec  If 1 = on / f 3= on J
A>SE7  filespec  fM=onJ

If  you  have  a  program  that  runs  under  CP/M  or  CP/M-86  but  does  not  run
properly  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  use  the  following guidelines  to  select  the  proper
compatibility  attributes  for  the  program. 

* . .

. 

•  If the program  ends  with  the "File  Currently Opened" message when multiple
copies  of  the  program  are  run,  set  compatibility  attribute  Fl',  or  place  all
common  static files under  User  0  with  the  SYS and  Read-Only  attributes  set.

•  If  the  program  terminates  with  the  message  "Close  Checksum  Error",  set

compatibility  attribute F3\

•  If the  program  terminates  with  an  I/O  error,  try  running  the  program  with
attribute  F2'  set.  If  the  problem  persists,  then  try  attribute  F4'.  Use  attribute
F4'  only  as a  last  resort.

2.13  Multisector  I/O

The  BDOS  file  system  provides  the  capability  to  read  or  write  multiple  128-byte
records  in  a  single  BDOS  system  call. This  multisector facility  can  be  visualized as  a
BDOS  burst  mode,  enabling  a  process  to  complete  multiple I/O  operations  without
interference  from  other  running  processes.  In  addition,  the  BDOS  file  system  bypasses,
when  possible,  all  intermediate  record  buffering  during  multisector  I/O  operations.
Data  is  transferred  directly  between  the  calling process's  memory  and  the  drive.  The
BDOS  also  informs  the  XIOS  when  it  is reading  or  writing multiple physical records
on  a  drive.  The  XIOS  can  use this  information to  further  optimize  the  I/O  operation
resulting  in  even  better  performance.  As  a  result,  the  use  of  this  facility  in  an  appli-
cation  program  can  improve  its  performance  and  also  enhance  overall  system
throughput,  particularly  when  performing sequential  I/O.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

_

2-37

2.13  Multisector I/O 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  number  of  records  that  can be transferred with  multisector I/O  ranges  from  1
to  128.  This  value, called  the  BDOS Multisector  Count,  can  be  set  by the F_MUL-
TISEC  system call. The  P_CLI  system call sets  the  Multisector Count  to  one  when it
initiates  a  transient  program  for  execution.  Note  that  the  greatest  potential  perfor-
mance  increases  are  obtained  when  the  Multisector  Count  is set  to  128. Of  course,
this  requires  a  16K  buffer.  The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  PIP utility performs its sequen-
tial  I/O  with  a Multisector  Count  of 128.

The  Multisector  Count  determines  the  number  of  operations  to  be  performed by

the  following BDOS system calls: 

^

•  F_READ and F_WRITE  system calls
•  F_READRAND,  F_WRITERAND, and F_WRITEZF
•  F_LOCK and FJJNLOCK

If  the  Multisector  Count  is N,  calling one  of  the  above  system  calls  is equivalent  to
making  N  system  calls.  With  the  exception  of  disk  I/O  errors  encountered  by  the
XIOS,  if  an  error  interrupts a  multisector  read  or  write  operation,  the  file  system
returns  the  number  of  128-byte  records  successfully  transferred  in  register  AH.
Section 2.14 describes how the Multisector Count affects the F_LOCK and F_UNLOCK
system  calls.

2.14  Concurrent File Access

,*

Concurrent  CP/M-86  supports  two  open  modes,  Read-Only  and  Unlocked,  which
allow  concurrently  running  processes  to  access  common  files  for  record  operations.
The  Read-Only  open  mode  allows  multiple  processes  to  read  from  a  common  file,
but  processes  cannot  write  to  a file open  in this mode.  Thus, files remain static  when 
they  are  opened  in  Read-Only  mode.  The  Unlocked  open  mode  is  more  complex
because  it  allows  multiple processes  to  read  and  write  records  to  a  common file. As
a  result,  Unlocked  mode  has  some  important  differences  from  the  other  open  modes.

",

2-38

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.14  Concurrent File Access

When  a  process  opens  a  file  in  Unlocked  mode,  the  file  system  returns  a  2-byte
field called  the  File ID  in  the  RO and  Rl  bytes  of  the  FCB.  The  File ID  is a  required
parameter  of  Concurrent  CP/M-86's  record  locking  system  calls,  F_LOCK  and
F_UNLOCK,  which  are  only  supported  for files open  in  Unlocked mode.  Note  that
these  system  calls  return  a  successful  error  code  if  they  are  called  for  files  opened  in
Locked  mode.  However,  they  perform no  action  in  this  case,  because,  by  definition,
the  calling  process  has  the  entire file locked.

The  F_LOCK  and  F_UNLOCK  system  calls  allow  a  process  to  establish and  release
temporary  ownership  to  particular records  within a file. You  must set the  FCB Ran-
dom  Record  field  and  place  the  File  ID  in  the  first  two  bytes  of  the  current  DMA
buffer  before  making  these  calls.  The  file  system locks  and  unlocks records  in units
of  128  bytes, which  is the  standard  Concurrent  CP/M-86  record  size.  The  number of
records  locked  or  unlocked  is controlled  by  the  BDOS Multisector  count,  which can
range  from  1 to  128  (see Section  2.13).  In order  to  simplify  the  discussion of  record
locking  and  unlocking,  the  following  paragraphs  assume  the  Multisector  count  is
one.  However,  as  discussed  later  in  this  section,  the  more  general  case  of multiple
record  locking  and  unlocking is  a  simple extension  of  the  single record  case.

The  F_LOCK  system  call  supports  two  types  of  lock  operations:  exclusive locks
and  shared  locks.  Interface  attribute F5'  specifies  the  type  of  lock.  F5'  =  0  requests
an  exclusive  lock;  F5'  =  1  requests  a  shared  lock.  If a  process  locks  a  record  with
an  exclusive  lock,  other  processes  cannot  read,  write,  or  lock  the  record.  The  locking
process,  however,  can  access the  record  with  no  restrictions. You should use this type
of  lock  when  exclusive control  over  a  record  is  required.

If  a  process  locks  a  record  with  a  shared  lock,  other  processes  cannot  write  to  the
record or  make  an exclusive lock  of the record. However,  other processes  are  allowed
to  read  the  record  and  make  their  own  shared  locks  on  the  record.  No  process,
including  the  locking process,  can  write  to  a  record  with  a  shared  lock.  Shared  locks
are  useful  when  you  want  to  ensure  that  a  record  does  not  change,  but  you  want  to
allow  other  processes  to  read  the  record.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-39

2.14  Concurrent  File Access 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  F_LOCK  system  call  also  lets  you  change  the  lock  of  a  record  if  there  is  no
conflict.  For  example,  you  can  convert  an  exclusive lock  into  a  shared  lock  with  no
restrictions.  On  the  other  hand,  a  process  cannot  convert a  record's  shared  lock  to
an  exclusive  lock  if another  process  has  a  shared  lock  on  the  record. 

'

The  F_LOCK  system  call  has  another  option,  specified  by interface  attribute  F6',
which  controls  whether  a  record  must  exist  in  order  to  be  locked.  If  you  make  a
F_LOCK  system  call  with  F6'  =  0,  the  file  system  returns  an  error  code  if  the
specified  record  does  not  exist  within  the file. Setting F6'  to  1 requests  a  logical  lock
operation.  Logical  lock  operations  are  only  limited  by  the  maximum  Concurrent
CP/M-86 file size of  32  megabytes,  which  corresponds  to  a  maximum  Random  Rec-
ord  Number  of 262,143. You can  use logical locks to  control  extending a shared file.

The  F_UNLOCK  system  call is similar to  the  F_LOCK  call  except  that  it removes
locks  instead  of  creating  them.  There  are  few  restrictions  on  unlock  operations.  Of
course  a  process  can  only  remove  locks  that  it  has  made.  The  F_UNLOCK  system
call  has  one  option,  controlled  by  interface  attribute  F5'.  If  F5'  is  set  to  one,  the
F_UNLOCK  system  call  removes  all  locks  for  the  file  made  by  the  calling  process.
Otherwise,  it  removes  the  locks  specified by the  Random  Record field and  the  BDOS
Multisector  Count.  Note  that  the  F_CLOSE  system call  also  removes  all locks  for  a
file on  permanent  close operations.

If  the  BDOS Multisector  Count  is greater  than  one,  the F_LOCK  and  F_UNLOCK
system  calls perform multiple record  locking or  unlocking. In general, multiple  record
locking  and  unlocking  can  be  viewed  as  a  sequence  of  N  independent  operations,
where N  equals the  Multisector  Count.  However,  if an  an  error occurs on  any  record
within  the  sequence,  no  locking or  unlocking is performed. For example, both  F_LOCK
and  F_UNLOCK  perform  no  action  and  return  an  error  code  if the  sum  of  the  FCB
Random  Record  Number  and  the  BDOS Multisector  Count  is greater  that  262,144. 
As  another  example,  the  F_LOCK  system  call  also  returns  an  error  code  if  another
process  has  an  exclusive lock  on  any  record  within  the  sequence. 

'  . •  -

"~~

When  a process  makes a F_LOCK  system call, the file system allocates a new entry
in  the  system  Lock  List to  record  the  lock  operation  and  associate  it with  the calling
process.  A corresponding  F_UNLOCK  system call removes the  locked  entry from  the
list.  While  the  lock  entry  exists  in  the  system  Lock  List,  the  file  system enforces  the
restrictions  implied by  the  lock  item.

2-40

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.14  Concurrent  File  Access

Because  each  lock  item  includes  a  record  count  field,  a  multiple  lock  operation
normally  results  in  the  creation  of  a  single  new  entry.  However,  if  the  file  system
must  split  an  existing  lock  entry  to  satisfy  the  lock  operation,  an  additional  entry  is
required.  Similarly, an  unlock  operation  can  require  the  creation  of  a  new  entry  if a
split  is  needed.  Thus,  in  the  worst  case,  a  lock  operation  can  require  two  new  lock
entries  and  an  unlock  operation  can  require one.  Note that  lock  item splitting  can be
avoided  by locking  and  unlocking  records  in consistent  units.

These  considerations  are  important  because  the  Lock  List  is  a  limited  resource
under  Concurrent  CP/M-86. The file system  performs  no  action  and  returns  an  error
code  if  insufficient  available entries  exist  in  the  system  Lock  List  to  satisfy  the  lock
or  unlock  request.  In  addition,  the  number  of  lock  items  a  single process  is  allowed
to  consume  is  a  GENCCPM  parameter.  The file system  also  returns  an  error  code if
this  limit  is exceeded.

The  file  system  performs  several  special  operations  for  read  and  write  system calls
to  a  file  open  in  Unlocked  mode.  These  operations  are  required  because  the  file
system  maintains the  current  state  of  an  open file in the  calling process's  FCB.  When
multiple  processes  have  the  same  file  open,  FCBs  for  the  same  file  exist  in  each
process's  memory.  To  ensure  that  all  processes  have  current  information,  the  file
system  updates  the  directory  immediately when  an  FCB for  an  unlocked file is changed.
In  addition,  the  file  system  verifies  error  situations  such  as  end-of-file,  or  reading
unwritten  data  with  the  directory  before  returning  an  error.  As  a  result,  read  and
write  operations  are  less efficient  for files open  in  Unlocked mode  when  compared  to
equivalent  operations  for files opened  in  Locked  mode.

2.15  File  Byte  Counts

Although  the  logical  record  size of  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is restricted  to  128  bytes,
the file system  does  provide  a  mechanism to  store  and  retrieve a byte count  for  a file.
This  facility  can  identify  the  last  byte of the  last  record  of  a file. The  BDOS  Compute
File  Size  function  returns  the  last  Random  Record  Number,  +  1, of  the  last  record
of  a file.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

.

2-41

2.15  File Byte Counts 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  F_ATTRIB system  call can  set a file's byte count.  This  is an option  controlled
by  interface  attribute  F6'.  Conversely,  the  F_OPEN  system  call  can  return  a  file's
byte  count  to  the  CR  field  of  the  FCB.  The  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls
also  return  a file's byte count.  These  system calls return the  byte count  in the  CS field
of  the  FCB  returned  in  the  current  DMA  buffer. 

i  ^

. 

Note that  the file system  does  not  access  or  update  the  byte  count  value in  BDOS
read  or  write system calls. However,  the  F_MAKE system call does set the byte count
value to  zero  when  it creates a file in the  directory.

2.16  Record  Blocking  and  Deblocking

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  logical  record  size  for  disk  I/O  is  128  bytes.  This 
is the  basic  unit  of data  transfer between  the operating  system and  running  processes.
However,  on  disk,  the  record  size is not  restricted  to  128 bytes. These  records, called
physical  records, can  range  from  128  bytes  to  4K bytes  in size. Record  blocking  and
deblocking  is  required  on  systems  that  support  drives  with  physical  record  sizes
larger  than  128  bytes.

The  process  of  building up  physical  records  from  128-byte logical  records  is called
record  blocking.  This  process  is required in  write  operations.  The  reverse process of
breaking  up  physical  records  into  their  component  128-byte  logical  records  is  called
record  deblocking.  This  process  is  required  in  read  operations.  Under  Concurrent
CP/M-86, record  blocking  and  deblocking  is normally performed  by the  BDOS.

Record  deblocking  implies a read-ahead  operation.  For example,  if a process  reads
a  logical  record  that  resides at  the  beginning of  a physical record,  the  entire physical
record  is read  into  an  internal  buffer.  Subsequent BDOS read  calls for  the  remaining 
logical  records  access  the  buffer  instead  of  the  disk.  Conversely,  record  blocking
results  in  the  postponement  of  physical  write  operations  but  only  for  data  write
operations.  For  example,  if a transient program  makes a BDOS write call, the logical
record  is  placed  in  a  buffer  equal  in  size  to  the  physical  record  size.  The  write
operation  on  the  physical  record  buffer  is  postponed  until  the  buffer  is  needed  in
another  I/O operation.  Note  that  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  directory  write  opera-
tions  are never  postponed.

*

j

2-42

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.16  Record Blocking and Deblocking

Postponing  physical  record  write  operations  has  implications for  some  application
programs.  For  programs  that  involve  file  updating,  it  is  often  critical  to  guarantee
that  the  state  of  the  file  on  disk  parallels  the  state  of  the  file  in  memory  after  an
update  operation. This  is only  an  issue on  drives where  physical write  operations  are
postponed  because  of  record  blocking  and  deblocking.  If  the  system  should  crash
while  a  physical  buffer  is pending,  data  would  be  lost.  To  prevent  this  loss  of  data,
the  F_FLUSH  system  call  can  be  called  to  force  the  write  of  any  pending  physical
buffers  associated  with  the  calling process.

Note: 
the  file  system  discards  all  pending  physical  data  buffers  when  a  process
terminates.  However,  the  file  system  automatically  makes  a  F_FLUSH  call  in  the
F_CLOSE  system call. Thus,  it  is sufficient  to  make  a F_CLOSE  system call to  ensure
that  all pending  physical buffers  for  that file are  written  to  the  disk.

2.17  Reset, Access,  and  Free Drive 

»

The  BDOS  system  calls  DRV_ALLRESET,  DRV_RESET,  DRV_ACCESS,  and
DRV_FREE  allow  a  process  to  control  when  to  reinitialize a  drive directory  for file
operations.  This  process  of  initializing a  drive's  directory  is  called  logging-in  the
drive.

When  you  start  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  all  drives  are  initialized to  the  reset  state.
Subsequently,  as  processes  reference  drives,  the  file  system  automatically  logs  them
in.  Once  logged-in,  a  drive  remains  in  the  logged-in  state  until  it  is  reset  by  the
DRV_ALLRESET  or  DRV_RESET  system calls or  a  media change is detected  on  the
drive.  If  the  drive  is  reset,  the  file  system  automatically  logs  in  the  drive  again  the
next  time  a  process  references it.  The file system  logs  in  a  drive  immediately  when  it
detects  a  media  change  on  the  drive.

Note that  the  DRV_ALLRESET and  DRV_RESET  system  calls have similar  effects
except  that  the  DRV_ALLRESET  system  call  affects  all  drives  on  the  system.  You
can  specify the  combination  of  drives  to  reset  with  the  DRV_RESET  system  call.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-43

2.17  Reset,  Access,  and Free Drive 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Logging-in  a  drive  consists  of  several steps.  The  most  important  step  is the initiali-
zation  of  the  drive's  allocation  vector.  The  allocation  vector  records  the  allocation
and  deallocation  of  data  blocks  to  files,  as files are  created,  extended,  deleted  and
truncated.  Another  function  performed during drive log-in is the  initialization  of  the
directory  checksum  vector.  The file system  uses the  checksum vector  to  detect  media
changes  on  a  drive.  Note  that  permanent  drives, which do  not  support  media changes,
might  not  have  checksum  vectors.

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  DRV_RESET  operation  is  conditional.  The file
system  cannot  reset  a  drive for  a  process  if  another  process  has  an  open  file  on  the
drive.  However,  the  exact  action  taken  by  a  DRV_RESET  operation  depends  on
whether  the  drive to  be reset  is permanent or removable.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  determines  whether  a  drive  is  permanent  or  removable by
interrogating  a  bit  in  the  drive's  Disk  Parameter  Block  (DPB) in  the  XIOS.  A high-
order  bit  of  1 in  the  DPB Checksum Vector  Size field designates the  drive as perma-
nent.  A drive's  Removable or  Nonremovable designation is critical to  the  reset  oper-
ation  described  below.

The  BDOS  first determines whether  there are  any files currently open  on  the drive
to  be  reset.  If there  are  none,  the  reset  takes  place.  If there  are  open files, the  action
taken  by  the  reset  operation  depends  on  whether the  drive is removable and whether
the  drive  is  Read-Only  or  Read-Write.  Note  that  only the  DRV_SETRO  system call
can  set  a  drive to  Read-Only.  Following log-in, a drive is always Read-Write.

If  the  drive  is  a  permanent  drive  and  if  the  drive  is  not  Read-Only,  the  reset
operation  is not  performed,  but  a  successful  result is returned to  the calling  process.

However,  if the  drive,  is removable or  set  to  Read-Only, the file system determines 
whether  other  processes  have  open  files  on  the  drive.  If  they  do,  then  it  denies 
DRV_RESET  operation  and  returns  an  error  code  to  the calling process.

,
^*

If  all the  open files on  a  removable  drive belong to  the  calling process,  the  process
is  said  to  own  the  drive.  In this  case,  the file system performs a  qualified  reset  on  the
drive and  returns  a  successful  result.  This  means that  the next time a process  accesses
this  drive,  the  BDOS  performs  the  log-in  operation  only if it  detects  a  media change
on  the  drive.  The  logic  flow  of  the  drive reset  operation  is shown  in Figure  2-6.

2-44

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

2.17  Reset, Access,  and  Free  Drive

OPEN  FILES
ON  DRIVE?

NO

Y ES

D R I VE
R E M O V A B L E^

D R I VE  R

NO

NO

YES

YES

RESET
D R I VE

DO  NOT  RESET
D R I VE

YES

OPEN  FILES
BELONG  TO
ANOTHER
PROCESS'?

NO

Q U A L I F I ED
RESET
PERFORMED

DISK
RESET
SUCCESS

DISK
RESET
DENIED

Figure  2-6.  Disk  System  Reset

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

2-45

2.17  Reset, Access,  and Free Drive 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

If  the  BDOS  detects  a  media  change  on  a  drive  after  a  qualified  reset,  it  purges  all
open files on  the  drive  from  the  system  Lock  List  and  subsequently  verifies all open
FCBs  in  file  operations  for  the  owning  process  (refer  to  Section  2.10  for  details  of
FCB verification).

In  all  other  cases  where  the  BDOS  detects  a  media  change  on  a  drive,  the  file
system  purges  all  open  files  on  the  drive  from  the  system  Lock  List,  and  flags  all
processes  owning  a  purged  file  for  automatic  open  FCB verification.

Note: 
open  FCB,  the file system  returns  to  the  process  with  an  FCB checksum  error.

if  a  process  references a  purged file with  a  BDOS  command  that  requires  an

The  primary  purpose  of  the  drive  reset  functions is to  prepare  for  a  media  change
on  a  drive.  Because  a  drive  reset  operation  is conditional,  it  allows  a  process  to  test
whether  it  is  safe  to  change  disks.  Thus,  a  process  should  make  a  successful  drive
reset  call  before  prompting  the  user  to  change disks. In addition,  you  should  close all
your  open files on  the  drive,  particularly files you  have written  to,  before  prompting
the  user  to  change  disks.  Otherwise,  you  might  lose  data.

The  DRV_ACCESS  and  DRV_FREE  system  calls  perform  special  actions  under
Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The  DRV_ACCESS system call inserts a dummy open file item
into  the  system Lock  List  for  each  specified  drive. While  that  item exists in the system
Lock  List,  no  other  process  can  reset  the  drive. The  DRV_FREE system  call  purges
the  Lock  List  of  all  items,  including open  file  items,  belonging to  the  calling  process
on  the  specified  drives.  Any  subsequent  reference  to  those  files  by  a  BDOS  system
call  requiring an  open  FCB results in  a  FCB checksum error  return.

The  DRV_FREE  system  call  has  two  important  side  effects.  First  of  all, any  pend-
ing  blocking/deblocking  buffers  on  a  specified  drive that  belong to  the calling process 
are  discarded.  Secondly,  any  data  blocks  that  have  been  allocated  to files that  have
not  been  closed  are  lost.  Be sure  to  close  your files before  making this system call.

j

2-46

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

2.17  Reset, Access,  and Free Drive

The  DRV_SETRO  system  call  is also  conditional  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The
file system  does  not  allow  a  process  to  set  a  drive  to  Read-Only  if  another  process
has  an  open file on  the  drive. This  applies to  both  removable and  permanent  drives.

A process  can  prevent  other  processes  from  resetting a Read-Only drive by  opening
a file on  the  drive  or  by  issuing  a  DRV_ACCESS  call for  the  drive  and  then  making
a  DRV_SETRO  system  call.  Executing  DRV_SETRO  before  the  F_OPEN  or
DRV_ACCESS  call  leaves  a  window  in  which  another  process  could  set  the  drive
back  to  Read-Write.  While  the  open  file  or  dummy  item  belonging  to  the  process
resides  in  the  system  Lock  List,  no  other  process  can  reset  the  drive to  take  it  out  of
Read-Only  status.

4

2.18  BDOS Error  Handling

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  file  system  has  an  extensive  error  handling  capability.

When  an  error  is detected,  the  BDOS  responds  in  one  of three ways:

1.  It  can  return  to  the  calling  process  with  return  codes  in  the  AX  register

identifying  the  error.

2.  It  can  display an  error  message on  the  console  and  terminate the  process.
3.  It  can  display  an  error  message  on  the  console  and  return  an  error  code  to

the  calling process,  as  in  method  1.

The  file  system  handles the  majority of  errors  it  detects  by  method  1. Two  examples
of  this  kind  of  error  are  the  "file  not  found"  error  for  the  F_OPEN  system  call  and
the  "reading  unwritten data"  error  for  the  F_READ  call.  More  serious errors,  such
as  disk  I/O  errors,  are  normally handled by  method  2.  Errors  in this category, called
physical  and  extended  errors,  can  also  be  reported  by  methods  1  and  3  under  pro-
gram  control.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-47

2.18  BDOS Error  Handling 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  BDOS  Error  mode,  which  has  three  states,  determines  how  the  file  system
handles  physical  and  extended  errors.  In  the  default  state,  the  BDOS  displays  the
error  message  and  terminates  the  calling process  (method 2).  In  Return  Error  mode,
the  BDOS  returns  control  to  the  calling process  with  the  error  identified  in  the  AX
register  (method  1). In  Return  and  Display Error  mode,  the  BDOS returns control  to
the  calling process  with  the  error  identified  in  the  AX  register  and  also  displays  the
error  message  at  the  console  (method  3).

While  both  return  modes  protect  a  process  from  termination  because of  a physical
or  extended  error,  the  Return  and  Display  mode  also  allows  the  calling process  to
take  advantage  of  the  built-in error  reporting  of  the  file  system.  Physical and  extended
errors  are  displayed on  the  console  in  the  following format:

CP/M  Error  on  d:  error  message
BDOS  Function  =  nn  File  =  filename.typ

where  d  is  the  name  of  the  drive  selected  when  the  error  condition  occurs;  error
message  identifies  the  error;  nn  is  the  BDOS  function  number,  and  filename.typ
identifies  the  file  specified  by  the  BDOS  function.  If  the  BDOS  function  did  not
involve  an  FCB,  the file information  is  omitted.

The  following  tables  detail  BDOS  physical  and  extended  error  messages.

»

2-48

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

2.18  BDOS  Error Handling

Table  2-12.  BDOS Physical Errors

Meaning

Disk  I/O

Invalid  Drive

Read/Only  File

Read/Only  Disk

The  "Disk  I/O"  error  results  from  an  error  condition  returned
to the BDOS from the XIOS module. The file system makes XIOS
read  and  write  calls to  execute  BDOS file-access system calls. If
the  XIOS  read  or  write  routine  detects  an  error,  it  returns  an
error  code  to  the  BDOS,  causing this error  message.

The  "Invalid  Drive"  error  also  results  from  an  error  condition
returned  to the BDOS from  the XIOS module. The BDOS makes
an  XIOS  Select  Disk  call  before  accessing a  drive to  perform  a
requested  BDOS  function.  If  the  XIOS  does  not  support  the
selected  disk,  it  returns  an  error  code  resulting in this error.

The  BDOS  returns  the  "Read/Only File" error message  when  a
process  attempts  to  write to  a file with  the R/O  attribute  set.

The  BDOS  returns  the  "Read/Only  Disk  error"  message  when
a process  makes a write operation  to a disk that  is in Read-Only
status.  A drive can be placed in Read-Only status explicitly with
the  DRV_SETRO  system call.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-49

2.18  BDOS  Error Handling 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Table  2-13.  BDOS  Extended Errors

Message 

Meaning

File  Opened  in  Read/Only  Mode

The BDOS returns the "File  Opened  in Read/Only Mode" error
message  when  a  process  attempts  to  write  to  a  file  opened  in
Read-Only  mode.  A process  can  open  a file in Read-Only mode
explicitly  by  setting  FCB  interface attribute  F6'.  In  addition,  if
a  process opens a file in  Locked  mode,  the file system  automat-
ically  forces the  open  mode  to  Read-Only mode when:

•  the current  user  number is zero  and the process  opens  a file

with  the  Read-Only  and  SYS attributes  set.

•  the current  user  number is not  zero  and the process  opens a

user  zero file with  the  SYS attribute set.

The  BDOS  also  returns  this error  if a process  attempts  to  write
to  a  file  that  is  password-protected  in  Write  mode,  and  it  did
not  supply the  correct  password  when  it opened  the file.

File  Currently  Open

The  BDOS  returns  the  "File  Currently  Open"  error  message
when  a process  attempts  to  delete, rename, or  modify  the  attri-
butes of a file opened  by another process. The BDOS also returns
this  error  when  a  process  attempts  to  open  a  file  in  a  mode
incompatible  with  the  mode  in  which  the  file  was  previously
opened  by another  process or  by the  calling  process.

Close  Checksum  Error

The  BDOS  returns  the "Close Checksum  Error" message when
the BDOS  detects a checksum  error in the FCB passed  to the file
system  with  a  F_CLOSE  call.

Password  Error

The  BDOS  returns  the  "Password  Error"  message  when  pass-
words  are  required  and  the file password  is not  supplied  or  is
incorrect.

2-50

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.18  BDOS  Error Handling

Table  2-13. 

(continued)

Message 

Meaning

File  Already Exists

Illegal  ? in  FCB

The  BDOS  returns the  "File  Already  Exists"  error  message  for
the  F_MAKE  and  F_RENAME  system  calls  when  the  BDOS
detects  a  conflict  on  filename  and filetype.

The  BDOS  returns  the  "Illegal  ? in  FCB"  error  message  when
the  BDOS detects  a  ? character in  the  filename  or  filetype  of  the
passed  FCB  for 
the  F_ATTRIB,  F_OPEN,  F_RENAME,
FJTIMEDATE, F_WRITEXFCB, FJTRUNCATE, and  F_MAKE
system  calls.

Open  File  Limit  Exceeded

The BDOS returns the "Open File Limit Exceeded"  error message
when  a  process  exceeds  the  process  file  lock  limit  specified  by
GENCCPM.  The  F_OPEN,  F_MAKE, and  DRV_ACCESS sys-
tem  calls can  return  this  error.

No  Room  in  System  Lock  List

The  BDOS  returns  the  "No  Room  in  System  Lock  List"  error
message  when  no  room  for  new entries exists within the system
Lock  List. The  F_OPEN,  F_MAKE, and  DRV_ACCESS system
calls  can  return  this  error.

The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  error  return  code  conventions  of  the  file
system  calls.  Most file system  calls  fall  into  three  categories  in regard  to  return  codes;
they  return  an  error  code,  a  directory  code,  or  an  error  flag.  The  error  conventions
let programs  written  for  CP/M-86  run  without  modification.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-51

2.18  BDOS Error Handling 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  following  BDOS system  calls  return  a logical  error  in register AL:

F_LOCK
F_READ
F_READRAND
FJJNLOCK 
F_WRITE 
F_WRITERAND
F_WRITEZF

. 

•
,

Table  2-14  lists error  code  definitions for  register AL.

Code 

OOH: 
01H: 
: 
02H: 
03H: 
04H: 
05H: 
06H: 
08H: 

09H: 

OAH: 
OBH: 
OCH: 
ODH: 
OEH: 
OFFH: 

Table  2-14.  BDOS Error Codes

Definition

Function  successful
Reading unwritten data
No  available  directory  space  (Write  Sequential)
No  available data  block
Cannot  close  current extent
Seek to  unwritten  extent
No  available directory  space
Random  record  number out  of range
Record  locked  by another  process
(restricted  to files opened  in Unlocked mode)
Invalid  FCB (previous BDOS F_CLOSE system call  returned an
error  code  and  invalidated the FCB)
FCB checksum error
Unlocked file unallocated  block  verify  error
Process  record  lock  limit exceeded
Invalid  File  ID
No  room  in  System Lock  List
Physical error  : refer  to  register AH

-  returned only for files opened  in  Unlocked  Mode
-  returned only by  the  F_LOCK  and  F_UNLOCK  system calls  for files opened

in  Unlocked mode

2-52

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.18  BDOS Error Handling

For  BDOS  read  and  write  system calls, the file system also  sets  register AH  when  the
returned  error  code  is  a  value  other  than  zero  or  OFFH.  In  this  case,  register  AH
contains  the  number  of  128-byte  records  successfully  read  or  written  before the error
was  encountered.  Note  that  register  AH  can  only  contain  a  nonzero  value  if  the
calling  process  has  set  the  BDOS  Multisector  Count  to  a  value  other  than  one;
system  calls
otherwise 
(Error  Code  =  0),  register  AH  is  also  set  to  zero.  If the  Error  Code  OFFH, register
AH  contains  a physical error  code  (see Table  2-15).

is  always  set 

to  zero.  On 

register  AH 

successful 

The  following BDOS system calls return  a  directory  code  in register  AL:

, 

. 

.

DRV_SETLABEL
F_ATTRIB
F_CLOSE
F_DELETE
F_MAKE 
F_OPEN
F_RENAME
F_SIZE
F_SFIRST
F_SNEXT
F_TIMEDATE
FJTRUNCATE
F_WRITEXFCB

The  directory  code  definitions for  register AL follow.

OOH  - 03H  : successful function

OFFH  : unsuccessful  function

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-53

2.18  BDOS Error Handling 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

With  the  exception  of  the  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls,  all  functions  in
this  category  return  with  the  directory  code  set  to  zero  upon  a  successful  return.
However,  for  these  two  system calls, a  successful  directory  code  identifies  the  relative
starting position  of  the  directory  entry  in  the  calling process's  current  DMA  buffer.

If  a  process  uses the  F_ERRMODE  system call to  place the  BDOS in  Return  Error
mode,  the  following  system  calls  return  an  error  flag  in  register  AL  on  physical
errors:

DRV_GETLABEL
DRV_ACCESS
DRV_SET
DRV_SPACE 
DRV  FLUSH
~ 

•

The  error  flag  definition  for  register AL follows.

OOH  : successful  function

OFFH  : physical error  : refer  to  register AH

<

The  BDOS returns nonzero  values in register AH  to  identify  a physical or  extended
error  if the  BDOS  Error  mode  is in  one  of  the  return  modes.  Except  for  system  calls
that  return  a  Directory  Code,  register  AL equal  to  OFFH  indicates that  register  AH
identifies  the  physical or  extended  error.  For  functions  that  return  a  Directory  Code,
if  register  AL equals 255,  and  register AH  is not  equal to  zero,  register AH  identifies
the  physical  or  extended  error.  Table  2-15  shows  the  physical  and  extended  error
codes  returned  in  register  AH.

2-54

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

2.18  BDOS Error Handling

Code 

01H 
02H 
03H 

04H 
05H 
06H 
07H 
08 H 
09H 
OAH 
OBH 

Table  2-15.  BDOS  Physical and Extended Errors

Explanation

»  • •• ,

Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error 
Read/Only  Disk
Read/Only  File,  File  Opened  in  Read/Only  Mode,  or  File  Password
Protected  in Write  Mode and  Correct  Password  Not Specified
Invalid Drive  : drive select  error
File Currently  Open  in an  incompatible  mode
Close  Checksum  Error
Password  Error
File Already Exists
Illegal  ? in  FCB
Open  File Limit  Exceeded
No  Room  in  System  Lock  List

The  following  two  system  calls  represent  a  special  case  because  they  return  an

address  in  register  AX.

DRV_ALLOCVEC
DRV_DBP

When  the  calling  process  is  in  one  of  the  BDOS  return  error  modes  and  the  BDOS
detects  a  physical  error  for  these  system  calls,  it  returns  to  the  calling process  with
registers  AX and  BX set to  OFFFFH. Otherwise,  they return no  error  code.

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  following  system  calls  also  represent  a  special

case.

DRV_ALLRESET
DRV_RESET
DRV  SETRO

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

2-55

2.18  BDOS  Error Handling 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

These  system  calls return  to  the  calling process with  registers AL and  BL set to  OFFH
if  another  process  has  an  open  file  or  has  made  a  DRV_ACCESS call  that prevents
the  reset  or  write  protect  operation.  If  the  calling process  is  not  in  Return  Error
mode,  these  system  calls  also  display  an  error  message identifying  the  process  that
prevented  the  requested  operation.

End  of  Section  2

2-56

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Section  3
Transient  Commands

3.1  Transient  Process Load  and Exit

A  transient  process  is  a  file  of  type  CMD  that  is  loaded  from  disk  and  resides in
memory  only  during  its  operation.  A  resident  system  process  is  a  file  of  type  RSP
that  is  included  in  Concurrent  CP/M-86  during GENCCPM.  Section  4  describes  the
three  system  memory  models  that  determine the  initial  values  of  segment  registers in
transient  processes.

You  can  initiate  a  transient  process  by  entering  a  command  at  a  system  console.
The  console's  TMP  (Terminal  Message  Processor)  then  calls  the  Command  Line
Interpreter  system call  (refer  to  the  P_CLI  system  call), and  passes to  it the  command
line  entered  by  the  user.  If  the  command  is  not  an  RSP, then  the  P_CLI  system  call
locates  and  then  loads  the  proper  CMD  file.  The  P_CLI system call  calls  the F_PARSE
system  call  that  parses  up  to  two  filenames  following  the  command,  and  places  the
properly  formatted  FCBs  at  locations  005CH  and  006CH  in  the  Base  Page  of  the
initial  Data  Segment.

The  P_CLI  system  call  initializes memory,  the  Process  Descriptor,  and  the  User
Data  Area  (UDA),  and  allocates  a  96-byte  stack  area,  independent of  the  program,
to  contain  the  process's  initial stack.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  divides the  DMA  address
into  the  DMA  segment  address  and  the  DMA  offset.  The  P_CLI system call initializes
the  default  DMA  segment  to  the  value  of  the  initial  data  segment,  and  the  default
DMA  offset  to  0080H.

The  P_CLI  system  call  creates  the  new  process  with  a  P_CREATE  system  call  and
sets  the  initial  stack  so  that  the  process  can  execute  a  Far  Return  instruction  to
terminate.  A process  also  ends  when  it  calls DRV_ALLRESET or  P_TERM.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

3-1

3.1  Transient  Process  Load and Exit

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

You  can  also terminate  a process  by typing a  single CTRL-C  during console  input.
See  C_MODE  for  details  of  enabling/disabling  CTRL-C.  CTRL-C  also  forces  a
DRV_RESET  call  for  each  logged-in  drive. This  DRV_RESET operation  only  affects
removable media  drives.

3.2  Command  File Format

A  CMD  file  consists  of  a  128-byte  header  record  followed  immediately  by  the
memory  image.  The  command file header  record  is composed  of  8 group  descriptors
(GDs),  each  9  bytes  long.  Each  group  descriptor  describes a  portion  of  the  program
to  be  loaded. The  format  of  the  header  record  is shown  in  Figure  3-1.

GD  1

GD  2

GD  3

G D4

GD  5

G D6

GD  7

GD 8

128 BYTES

Figure  3-1.  CMD  File Header Format

In  Figure 3-1,  GD  1 through  GD 8 represent group  descriptors.  Each group descriptor
corresponds  to  an  independently  loaded  program  unit  and  has  the  format  shown  in
Figure  3-2.

3-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

3.2  Command File Format

00 H

01H

03H

05H

07H

09H

G-TYPE

G-LENGTH

A-BASE

G-MIN

G-MAX

Figure 3-2.  Group Descriptor Format

G_Type  determines  the  group  descriptor  type.  The  valid  group  descriptors  have  a
G_Type  in  the  range  1  through  8,  as  shown  in  Table  3-1.  All  other  values  are
reserved  for  future  use. For  a  given CMD  file  header only a  Code  Group  and  one of
;
any  other  type  can  be  included. 

,  , 

; / 

. 

If  a  program  uses  either  the  Small or  Compact  Model,  the  code  group  is typically

pure; that  is, it is not  modified  during  program  execution.

Table  3-1.  Group Descriptors

G_Type

Group  Type

01H
02H
03H
04H
05H
06H
07H
08H

Code  Group
Data  Group
Extra  Group
Stack  Group
Auxiliary  Group  #1
Auxiliary  Group  #2
Auxiliary  Group  #3
Auxiliary  Group  #4

All  remaining values  in  the  group  descriptor  are  given  in  increments  of  16-byte
paragraph  units with an  assumed  low-order  0  nibble to  complete  the 20-bit  address.

id DIGITAL RESEARCH1

3.2  Command  File  Format

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Field

G_Length

A  Base

Table  3-2.  Group Descriptor Fields

Description

gives  the  number  of  paragraphs  in  the  group.  Given  a
G_length  of  080H,  for  example,  the  size  of  the  group  is
0800H  (2048  decimal)  bytes.

defines  the  base  paragraph  address  for  a  nonrelocatable
group.

G  Min/G  Max

define  the  minimum and  maximum size  of  the  memory
area  to  allocate to  the  group.

The  memory  model  described  by  a  header  record  is  implicitly  determined  by  the
group  descriptors  (refer  to  Section  4.1).  The  8080  Model  is  assumed  when  only  a
code  group  is  present,  because  no  independent  data  group  is  named.  The  Small
Model  is  assumed  when  both  a  code  and  data  group  are  present  but  no  additional
group  descriptors  occur.  Otherwise,  the  Compact  Model  is assumed when  the  CMD
file is loaded.

3.3  Base  Page  Initialization

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Base  Page  contains  default  values and  locations  initial-

ized  by  the  P_CLI  and  P_LOAD  system  calls and  used  by the  transient  process.

The  Base  Page  occupies  the  regions  from  offset  OOOOH  through  OOFFH  relative  to

the  initial data  segment,  and  contains  the  values  shown  in Figure  3-3.

3-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

3.3  Base  Page  Initialization

0

1

2

34

5 

6

M

H

41 I

H

0

6

C

12

18

1E

24

2A

30

50

56

5C

6C

7C

80

DRIVE

P2LEN

CR

CODE LENGTH
i
i 

DATA  LENGTH
i
i 

EXTRA  LENGTH

STACK  LENGTH
i
_i 

AUX 1

AUX  2

AUX  3

AUX  4

i

+

CODE  BASE

M80

DATA  BASE

RESERVED

EXTRA  BASE

RESERVED

STACK BASE

RESERVED

AUX  1

AUX  2

AUX  3

AUX  4

RESERVED

RESERVED

RESERVED

RESERVED

BYTES 03HO THROUGH 04FH ARE  NOT  CURRENTLY  USED  AND
ARE  RESERVED  FOR FUTURE USE BY DIGITAL  RESEARCH

PASSWORD  1 ADDR 

P1  LEN

PASSWORD  2  ADDR

RESERVED  FOR  FUTURE  USE
i

DEFAULT  FILE  NAME1

DEFAULT  FILE NAME2

! 

.

RANDOM  RECORD  NUMBER  (OPT)

' 

'

DEFAULT  128-BYTE DMA  BUFFER

Figure  3-3.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Base Page Values

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

3.3  Base Page Initialization 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  fields  in  the  Base Page  are  defined  as follows:

•  The M80  byte is a  flag  indicating whether the 8080  Memory  Model  was used

during load.  The  values of  the  flag  are  defined  as:

1  =  8080  Model
0  =  not  8080  Model

If  the  8080  Model  is used, the  code  length never exceeds  OFFFFH.

•  The bytes  marked  Aux 1 through  Aux 4 correspond  to a set of four  optional
independent  groups  that  might  be  required  for  programs  that  execute using
the  Compact  Memory  Model.  The  initial  values  for  these descriptors  are derived
from  the  header  record  in the  memory image file.

•  Length is stored  using the Intel convention: low,  middle, and high bytes.
•  Base refers  to the paragraph  address of the beginning of the segment.
•  The drive byte identifies  the drive from  which the transient program was read.
0  designates  the  default  drive, while  a  value  of  1 through  16  identifies  drives
A  through  P.

•  Password  1 Addr  (bytes 0051H-0052H)  contains the address of the password
field of  the  first  command  tail operand  in  the  default  DMA  buffer  at  0080H.
The  P_CLI  system  call  sets  this field to  0 if no  password  is specified.

•  PI  Len  (byte  0053H)  contains  the  length  of  the  password field for the first
command  tail  operand. The  P_CLI  system  call sets  this to  0 if no  password  is
specified.

•  Password  2 Addr  (bytes 0054H-0055H)  contains  the address  of the  password
field of  the  second  command  tail  operand  in  the  default  DMA  buffer  at  0080H.
The  P_CLI  system  call sets this field to  0  if no  password  is  specified.

•  P2 Len (byte 0056H)  contains  the length of the password field for the  second
command  tail  operand.  The  P_CLI  system  call  sets  this field to  0  if no  pass-
word  is  specified. 

' 

i

•  File Namel  (bytes 005CH-0067H)  is initialized by the P_CLI system call for
a  transient  program  from  the  first  command  tail  operand  of  the  command
line.

—— 
3-6

M  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

3.3  Base Page Initialization

•  File Name2  (bytes  006CH-0077H)  is initialized  by the  P_CLI  system  call for
a  transient  program  from  the  second  command  tail operand  of  the  command
line.
Note:  File  Namel  can  be  used  as  part  of  a  File  Control  Block  (FCB) begin-
ning  at  05CH.  To  preserve  File  Name2,  copy  it  to  another  location  before
using  the  FCB in file I/O  system calls.

•  The  CR  field  (byte  007CH)  contains  the  current  record  position  used  in

sequential file operations  with  the  FCB at  05CH.

•  The optional  Random  Record  Number  (bytes  007DH-007FH)  is an extension

of  the  FCB at  05 CH,  used  in  random  record  processing.

•  The  Default  DMA  buffer  (bytes  0080H-OOFFH) contains  the  command  tail

when  the  P_CLI  system  call  loads  a  transient program.

3.4  Parent/Child  Relationships

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  when  one  process  creates  another  process,  there  is a
parent/child  relationship  between  them.  The  child process  inherits most  of the  default
values  of  the  parent  process.  This  includes the  default  disk, user number, console,  list
device,  and  password.  The  child  process  also  inherits  interrupt  vectors  0,  1,  3,  4,
224,  and  225,  which  the parent  process initialized.

End  of  Section  3

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

3-7

Section  4
Command  File  Generation

4.1  Transient  Execution  Models

When  the  program  is loaded,  the  initial  values of the  segment registers, the instruc-
tion  pointer,  and  the  stack  pointer  are  determined  by  the  specific  type  of  memory
model  used  by  the  transient process,  indicated in the  CMD file header  record.

There  are  three  memory  models,  the  8080  model,  the  Small  Model,  and  the  Com-

pact  Model,  summarized in Table  4-1.

Table 4-1.  Concurrent  CP/M-86 Memory  Models

Model

8080  Model

Group  Relationships

Code  and  Data  Groups Overlap

Small  Model

Independent  Code  and  Data  Groups

Compact  Model

Three  or  More  Independent Groups

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

4-1

4.1  Transient  Execution Models 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  8080  Model  supports  programs  that  are  directly  translated  from  an  8080
environment  where  code  and  data  are  intermixed.  The  8080  Model  consists  of  one
group  that  contains  all  the  code,  data,  and  stack  areas.  Segment registers are initial-
ized  to  the  starting  address  of the  region  containing this group.  The  segment registers
can,  however,  be  managed  by  the  application  program  during  execution  so  that
,
multiple  segments  in the  code  group  can be addressed. 

. 

. 

The  Small Model  is similar  to  that  defined  by Intel, where  the  program  consists  of
an  independent  code  group  and  a data  group. The code and  data  groups  often  consist
of,  but  are  not  restricted  to,  single 64K byte segments.

The  Compact  Model  occurs  when  any  of  the  extra,  stack,  or  auxiliary groups  are
present  in  program.  Each  group  can  consist  of  one  or  more  segments,  but  if  any
group  exceeds  one  segment in  size, or  if auxiliary groups  are  present,  then  the  appli-
cation  program  must  manage its  own  segment  registers  during execution  in  order  to
address  all code  and  data  areas.

These  three  models  differ  primarily  in  how  the  operating  system  initializes  the
segment  registers  when  it  loads  a  transient  process.  The  P_LOAD  system  call  deter-
mines  the  memory  model  used  by  a  transient  program  by  examining the  program
group  usage,  as described  in the  following  sections.

4.1.1  The 8080 Memory  Model

The  8080  Model is assumed when the transient program contains only a code group. In
this case, the Command  Line Interpreter  (P_CLI) system call initializes the CS, DS, and
ES registers to  the  beginning of the  code group and  sets the SS and  SP registers to  a 96-
byte initial stack  area  that  it allocates.

4-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

4.1  Transient Execution Models

Note: 
the  P_CLI  system  call  initializes the  stack  so  that  if  the  process  executes  a
Far  Return  instruction,  it terminates.  This  system call sets the  Instruction Pointer (IP)
Register  to  100H,  thus  allowing Base Page values at the  beginning of the  code  group.
Following  program  load,  the  8080  Model  appears  as shown  in Figure 4-1.

CODE/DATA

CODE/DATA

BASE  PAGE

96  BYTES

CS'IP

0100H  +-

CS:0,DS:0,ES:0

SS:SP

OOOH

048H

OOH

Figure 4-1.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  8080 Memory  Model

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

4-3

4.1  Transient  Execution  Models 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  intermixed  code  and  data  areas  are  indistinguishable. The  Base  Page  values  are
described  in  Section  3.3.  The  following  ASM-86  example  shows  how  to  code  an
8080 Model  transient  assembly  language  program.

endcs 

cseg
org 

equ 
dseg
org 

•

end

lOOh

(code)
$

offset  endcs

(data)

4.1.2  The  Small  Memory  Model

The  Small Model  is assumed when  the transient program  contains both a code  and  data
group.  (In ASM-86,  all code  is generated  following a  CSEG  directive.  Data  is  defined
following  a  DSEG  directive, with  the  origin  of  the  Data  Segment  independent  of  the
Code Segment.) In this model,  the P_CLI  system call sets the CS register to the beginning
of  the  data  group,  and  the  SS and  SP registers  to  a  96-byte  initial stack  area  that  it in-
itializes.  Following  program  load, the  Small Model  appears  as shown  in Figure  4-2.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

4.1  Transient Execution  Models

DATA

0100H+-

CODE

BASE  PAGE

DS  0  ES 0
CS  0  IP 0

OOOOH

S S SP

48H

OOH

96-BYTES

Figure 4-2.  Concurrent CP/M-86  Small Memory Model

The  machine code  begins  at  CS + OOOOH, the  Base  Page values  begin at  DS + OOOOH,
and  the  data  area  starts  at  DS + OIOOH.  The  following  ASM-86 example shows  how
to  code  a  Small  Model  transient assembly language program.

cseg

•

dseg
org 

end

(code)

lOOh

(data)

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

4-5

4.1  Transient  Execution Models

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

4.1.3  The Compact Memory  Model

The  Compact  Model  is assumed  when  code  and  data  groups  are  present,  along with
one  or  more  of the  remaining stack,  extra, or  auxiliary  groups.  In this case,  the  P_CLI
system  call  sets  the  CS, DS,  and  ES registers  to  the  base  addresses  of  their respective
areas,  with  the  IP set to  OOOOH, and  the SS and  SP registers  set to  a 96-byte stack  area
allocated  by  this  system  call.

Figure  4-3  shows  the  initial  configuration  of  the  segments  in  the  Compact  Model.
The  values  of  the  various  segment  registers  can  be  changed  during  execution  by
loading  from  the  initial  values  placed  in  Base  Page.  This  allows  access  to  the  entire
memory  space.

CS.IP
OOOOH

CODE

0100H

DATA

BASE  PAGE

DS:OOOOH

048H

SS.SP 

+•  OOH

96-BYTES

DATA

ES  OOOOH

Figure 4-3.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Compact  Memory  Model

4-6

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

4.1  Transient Execution Models

If  the  assembly  language  transient  program  intends  to  use  the  stack  group  as  a
stack  area,  the  SS and  SP registers  must  be  set  upon  entry.  The  SS and  SP  registers
remain  in  the  initial stack  area,  even if a  stack  group  is  defined.

Although  it  appears  that  the  SS and  SP registers  should  be  set to  address  the  stack
group,  there  are  two  contradictions.  First,  the  assembly language transient  program
might  be  using  the  stack  group  as  a  data  area.  In  that  case,  the  stack  values set  by
the  P_CLI  system  call  to  allow  a  far  return  to  terminate  a  transient  program  could
overwrite  data  in  the  stack  area.  Second,  the  SS register would  logically be  set to  the
base  of  the  group,  while  the  SP would  be  set  to  the  offset  of  the  end  of  the  group.
However,  if the  stack  group  exceeds  64K,  the  address range  from  the  base to  the  end
of  the  group  exceeds  a  16-bit  offset  value.

The  following  ASM-8 6  example  shows  how  to  code  a  Compact  Model  assembly

language  transient  program.

cseg

•

dseg
org 

•

eseg

sseg

. 
end

(code)

lOOh

(data)

(more data)

(stack area)

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

4-7

4.2  GENCMD 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

4.2  GENCMD

The  GENCMD  utility  creates  a CMD file from  an  input HEX file. GENCMD  does

not  alter  the  original  HEX file. The GENCMD  invocation  has the  following  form:

GENCMD filename {parameter-list}

where  the filename corresponds  to  the  HEX  input file with  an  assumed  and  unspeci-
fied  filetype  of  H86.  GENCMD  accepts  optional  parameters  to  specifically  identify
the  8080  Model  and  to  describe  memory  requirements  of  each  segment  group.  The
GENCMD  parameters  are  listed  following  the  filename,  as  shown  in  the  command
line  above  where  the  parameter  list  consists  of  a  sequence  of  keywords  (shown  below)
and  values separated  by commas  or  blanks.

8080  CODE  DATA 

EXTRA 

STACK  XI  X2  X3  X4

The  8080  keyword  forces  a  single  code  group  so  that  the  P_LOAD  system  call  sets
up  the  8080  Model  for  execution,  allowing  intermixed  code  and  data  in  a  single
segment.  The  form  of  this command  is

GENCMD filename 8080

The  remaining  keywords  follow  the  filename  or  the  8080  option  and  define  specific
memory  requirements  for  each  segment  group,  corresponding  one-to-one  with  the
segment  groups  defined  in  the  previous  section.  In  each  case,  the  values  correspond-
ing  to  each  group  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets  and  separated  by  commas.  Each
value  is  a  hexadecimal  number  representing  a  paragraph  address  or  segment  length
in  paragraph  units  denoted  by  hhhh,  prefixed  by  a  single  letter  that  defines  each
value:

Ahhhh 
Bhhhh 
Mhhhh 
Xhhhh 

Load  the  group  at  absolute  location  hhhh
The  group  starts  at  hhhh  in the  hex file
The  group  requires  a  minimum of  hhhh  *  16 bytes
The  group  can  address  a  maximum  of hhhh  *  16  bytes

4-8

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

V^/

^> 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

4.2  GENCMD

Generally,  the  CMD  file  header  record  values are  derived  directly from  the  HEX file
and  the  parameters  shown  above  need  not  be  included.  The  following  situations,
however,  require  the  use of  GENCMD  parameters.

•  The 8080  keyword  is included  whenever  ASM-86  is used in the conversion of
8080  programs  to  the  8086/8088  environment when  code  and  data  are inter-
mixed  within  a  single  64K  segment,  regardless  of  the  use of  CSEG  and  DSEG
directives  in  the  source  program.

•  An  absolute  address  (a hexadecimal  value)  must  be given  for any group  that
must  be  located  at  an  absolute  location.  This  value is not  usually specified,  as
Concurrent  CP/M-86  cannot  ensure that  the  required  memory  region  is avail-
able.  In that  case  the  CMD file cannot  be  loaded.

•  The B value is used  when  GENCMD  processes  a HEX file produced  by Intel's
OH86  or  a  similar  utility  program  that  contains  more  than  one  group.  The
output  from  OH86 consists  of a sequence of data  records  with  no information
to  identify  code,  data,  extra,  stack,  or  auxiliary groups.  In  this  case,  the  B
value  marks  the  beginning address  of  the  group  named  by the  keyword,  caus-
ing  GENCMD  to  load  data  following this  address  to  the  named  group  (refer
to  the  examples  below). Thus,  the  B value is usually  used  to  mark  the  bound-
ary  between  Code  and  Data  Segments when  no  segment  information is included
in  the  HEX  file.  Files  produced  by  ASM-86  do  not  require  the  use  of  the  B
value  because  segment  information is included  in the  HEX file.

•  The  minimum  memory  value  (M value)  is included  only  when  the HEX  rec-
ords  do  not  define  the  minimum memory  requirements for  the  named  group.
Generally,  the  code  group  size  is  determined  precisely  by  the  data  records
loaded  into  the  area.  The  total  space  required  for  the  group  is  defined  by  the
range  between  the  lowest  and  highest  data  byte  addresses.  The  data  group,
however,  might  contain  uninitialized storage  at  the  end  of the group.  Thus  no
data  records  are  present  in  the  HEX  file  that  define  the  highest  referenced
data  item.  The  highest  address  in  the  data  group  can  be  defined  within  the
source  program  by  including the  ASMS 6  directive DB 0  as  the  last  data  item
in  the  assembly language  source file. Alternatively, the  M  value  can  be included
to  allocate  the  additional  space  at  the  end  of  the  group.  Similarly,  the  stack,
extra,  and  auxiliary group  sizes must  be  defined  using the  M  value unless the
highest  addresses  within  the  groups  are  implicitly defined  by  data  records  in
the  HEX file.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™ 

.

4-9

4.2  GENCMD 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

•  The  maximum  memory  size,  given  by  the  X  value,  is  generally  used  when
additional  free  memory  might  be  needed  for  such  purposes  as  I/O  buffers  or
symbol  tables.  If the  data  area  size is fixed, then  the  X  parameter  need  not  be
included.  In  this  case,  the  X  value is assumed  to  be  the  same  as  the  M  value.
The  value  XFFFF  allocates  the  largest  memory  region  available but,  if  used,
the  assembly  language  transient  program  must  be  aware  that  a  three-byte
length  field  is produced  in  the  Base  Page  for  this  group  where  the  high-order
byte  might  be  nonzero.  Programs  converted  directly  from  an  8080  environ-
ment  or  programs  that  use  a  2-byte  pointer  to  address  buffers  should restrict
this  value  to  XFFF  or  less,  producing  a  maximum  allocation  length  of  OFFFOH
bytes.

The  following  GENCMD  command  line  transforms  the  file  X.H86  into  the file

X.CMD  with  the  proper  header  record:

OA>GEA/CtfD  x  codetatlOl  da t af m30 *xf  f f 1

In  this  case,  the  code  group  is  forced  to  paragraph  address  40H  or  its  equivalent,
byte  address  400H. The  data  group  requires  a  minimum of 300H  bytes,  but  can use
up  to  OFFFOH  bytes,  if available.

Assuming  a  file  Y.H86  exists  on  drive  B  containing  Intel  HEX  records  with  no

interspersed  segment  information,  the  command

QA>GENCMD b :  Y da t a[b30  tttiZOJ  extra  Cb501 stack  [ia40Jxl  [a40J

produces  the file Y.CMD on  drive B by selecting records  beginning at  address  OOOOH
and  less  than  0300H  for  the  Code  Segment,  with  records  starting  at  0300H  and  less
than  0500H  allocated  to  the  Data  Segment.  The  Extra  Segment is filled from  records 
beginning  at  0500H  and  higher,  while  the  Stack  and  Auxiliary  Segment  #1  are
uninitialized  areas  requiring  a  minimum  of  0400H  bytes  each.  In  this  example,  the
data  area  requires  a  minimum  of 0200H  bytes. Note  again  that  the  B value need  not
be  included  if the  Digital  Research  ASM-86  assembler is  used.

\-

4-10

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

4.3 

Intel  Hexadecimal File Format

O

4.3 

Intel  Hexadecimal  File Format

i

GENCMD  input  must  be  in  Intel  hexadecimal file format,  produced  by  both  the
Digital  Research  ASM-86  assembler  and  the  standard  Intel  OH86  utility  program.
(Refer  to  Intel  MCS-86  Software  Development  Utilities  Operating  Instructions 
for
7S/S-/7™  Users,  published by  Intel.)  The  CMD  file  produced  by  GENCMD  contains
a  header  record  defining the  memory  model  and  memory  size requirements  for  load-
ing  and  executing  the  CMD file.

An  Intel  hexadecimal  file  consists  of  the  traditional  sequence  of  ASCII  records
where  the  beginning of  the  record  is marked  by an  ASCII  colon,  and  each subsequent
digit  position  contains  an  ASCII  hexadecimal digit  in  the  range 0-9  or  A-F.

There  are  four  kinds  of  hexadecimal  record  formats.  The  Start  Address  Record
specifies  the  starting  address  of  the  execution  file.  The  Extended  Address  Record
specifies  the  bits  4-19  of  the  Segment  Base  Address,  where  bits  0-3  of  the  SB A  are
zero.  The  Data  Record  contains  a  string  of  hexadecimal  ASCII  code  that  represents
a  portion  of  the  8086  memory  image.  The  End-of-File  record  specifies  the  end  of  the
object file.

Figure  4-4  shows  the  four  record  formats,  their  fields,  and  the  contents  of  these

fields. The fields are  defined in Table  4-2.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

4-11

4.3 

Intel Hexadecimal  File Format

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

04

0000

03

HHHH

B

REC  MARK 

R E C L EN 

ZEROES 

REC T Y PE 

C-SEG  CHECKSUM

STARTING  ADDRESS  RECORD

02

0000

02

HHHH

B

REC  MARK 

REC  LEN 

ZEROES 

REC  TYPE 

USBA  CHECKSUM

EXTENDED  ADDRESS  RECORD

REC M A RK  REC LEN  LD ADDR 

REC TYPE

CHECKSUM

HHHH

00

DATA

B

I HH

DATA RECORD

00

0000

01

REC MARK  RECLEN 

ZEROES 

RECTYPE 

CHECKSUM

END OF FILE RECORD

Figure 4-4. 

Intel Hexadecimal  File Formats

4-12

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

4.3 

Intel Hexadecimal  File Format

Field

Rec Mark

Rec Len

Zeroes

Ld  Addr

Rec  Type

Table  4-2. 

Intel  Hex  Field Definitions

Contents

Specifies  start  of  record

Record  Length  00-FF  (0-255  in decimal)

Extended  Address Record:  OOOOH
Starting  Address Record:  OOOOH
End-of-File  Record:  OOOOH

Data  Record:  SBA  offset  defining  address 
of  byte 0  of  data

-  -•'•' 

•••  '*

00  =  Data  Record
01  =  End  of  File  Record
02  =  Extended  Address Record
03  =  Starting Address  Record

The  following  are  output  from  ASM-86  only:

81  same  as 00,  data  belongs to  Code  Segment
82  same  as 00,  data  belongs to  Data Segment
83  same  as 00,  data  belongs to  Stack Segment
84  same as 00,  data  belongs to  Extra Segment
85  paragraph  address  for  absolute Code  Segment
86  paragraph  address  for  absolute Data  Segment
87  paragraph  address  for  absolute Stack Segment
88  paragraph  address  for  absolute Extra Segment

C-Seg

Four hexadecimal digits specifying the Code Segment  address.
The  high-order  and  low-order  digits  are  the  10th  and  13th
characters  of  the  record, respectively.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

4-13

4.3 

Intel  Hexadecimal  File  Format 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Field 

USBA 

data 

Checksum 

Table  4-2. 

(continued)

Contents

Four  hexadecimal  digits  specifying  the  Upper  Segment Base
Address.  The  high-order  and  low-order  digits  are  the  10th
and  13th  characters  of the  record,  respectively.

Pairs  of  hexadecimal  digits  representing  the  ASCII  code  for
each  data  byte. The  high-order  digit  is the  first  digit  of  each
pair.

Extended  Address  Record:  Checksum of  Rec
Len, Zeroes,  Rec Type,  and  USBA fields.
Starting  Address  Record:  Checksum  of  Rec
Len,  Zeroes,  Rec Type,  C-Seg,  and
IP  fields.
Data  Record:  Checksum  of  Rec Len, Ld
Addr,  Rec  Type,  and  data  fields. 

/

End-of-File  Record:  Contains  ASCII  code
4646H, checksum of  Rec  Len,  Zeroes,
and  Rec Type  fields.

*  85,  86,  87,  and  88  are  Digital  Research  Extensions.

All  characters  preceding  the  colon  for  each  record  are  ignored.  See MCS  -86  Abso-
lute  Object  File  Formats,  published by  Intel,  for  additional  information on  hexadeci-
mal file record  format.

End  of  Section  4

4-14

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Section  5
Resident  System Process  Generation

5.1 

Introduction  to  RSPs 

<?/f  s  ; - > i/ 

•»?•.<;* 

I . L .?

Resident  System  Processes  are  programs  that  become  part  of  the  Concurrent
CP/M-86  operating  system.  They  can  be  useful  in  several ways:  to  create  a  turnkey
system,  autoloading  programs  when  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is  booted;  to  build  cus-
tomized  user  interfaces  or  shells  at  the  consoles,  for  monitoring  hardware  not  sup-
ported  in  the  XIOS;  and  to  avoid  disk  loading time for  frequently  used  commands.

The  source  code  for  the  ECHO  RSP is  included  in  Appendix  F.  Study this listing
carefully  while  reading  this  section.  The  discussion  of  the  P_CREATE  system  call  in
Section  6  is also  helpful  in  understanding RSPs.

Resident  System  Processes  are  included  in  Concurrent  CP/M-86  during  system
generation.  GENCCPM  searches  the  directory  for  all files with  the  filetype  RSP and
prompts  the  user  to  choose  whether  it  is to  be  included in  the  generated  system file,
CCPM.SYS.  An  RSP  file  is created  by  generating a  CMD  file  and  renaming it with  an
RSP  filetype.  The  GENCCPM  program  is  documented  in  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86
System  Guide.

5.2  RSP Memory Models

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  there  are  two  basic  memory  models  for  RSPs.  They
are  similar to  the  8080  Model  and  the  Small  Model  of transient programs.  However,
several  important  distinctions  exist  between  the  transient  program  and  RSP memory
models.  The  RSP has  no  equivalent to  the  Base  Page of the  transient program's  Data
Segment.  The  RSP is  responsible  for  its  own  Process  Descriptor  (PD) and  User  Data
Area  (UDA).  The  system  creates  and  initializes  these  data  structures  for  the  transient
programs  automatically at  load  time.  RSPs, on  the  other  hand,  must  initialize  these
structures  within  their  own  Data  Segments.

Note  that  Concurrent  CP/M-86  does  not  support  compact  model  RSPs. Extra  and

Stack  Segments must  be part  of  the  Data Segment.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5-1

5.2  RSP Memory  Models

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Although  there  is  no  Base Page  in  an  RSP,  there  is  an  RSP header that  must exist
at  offset  OOH of  the  Data  Segment.  In  the  8080  Model,  this  implies  that  the  RSP
header  is  in  the  Code  Segment.  The  RSP header  and  the  associated  data  structures
are  discussed  in Section 5.4.

5.2.1  8080 Model RSP

The  8080  Model  consists of  mixed code  and  data.  When  the  system  gives  control of
the CPU to an  8080  Model  RSP, it initializes the Code,  Data, Extra and  Stack Segment
registers to  the  same value. Use GENCMD  with the  8080  option  to  generate an  8080
Model  RSP.  GENCCPM  assumes the  8080  Model  if the  CMD  File  Header  Record of
the  RSP has a single Code  Group  Descriptor  and  no other  Group  Descriptors  (refer  to
Section 3.2). When discussing an  8080  Model  RSP, any reference  to  the Data Segment
also  refers  to  the  Code  Segment.

5.2.2  Small Model RSP

The  Small  Model  RSP implies separate  Code  and  Data  Segments. Before  the system
gives  control  of  the  CPU  to  a  Small  Model  RSP, it  initializes  the  Data,  Extra  and
Stack  Segment  Registers  to  the  Data  Segment  address,  while the  Code  Segment regis-
ter  is initialized to  the  Code  Segment address.  There  is no  guarantee where  GENCCPM
will  place  the  Code  Segment  in  memory  relative  to  the  Data  Segment.  The  CMD
Header  Record  for this kind  of RSP must have both  Data  and  Code  Group  Descriptors.

MIXED
CODE
AND
DATA

CS.,  DS

RSP  HEADER

DATA

RSP HEADER

CODE

DS

CS

HIGH

LOW

8080 MODEL

SMALL  MODEL

Figure 5-1.  8080  and Small RSP Models

5-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

5.3  Multiple Copies  of  RSPs

5.3  Multiple  Copies  of  RSPs

At  system generation, GENCCPM  can  make up  to  255  extra  copies of an  RSP, such
that  each  copy  generates  a  separate  process  running  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.
GENCCPM  accomplishes  this  by  making multiple copies  of  the  RSP; and  initializing
each  to  be  a  separate  RSP. The  number of  copies  made  by  GENCCPM  can  be  fixed,
or  dependent on  a  byte  value  in  the  System Data  Area. To  determine the  number of
copies  to  make, GENCCPM  looks  at  two  fields  in the  RSP Header.  The  format of the
RSP  Header  is  shown  in  figure  5-2. 

"  •

' 

BYTE  OOH 

02H 

04H 

05H 

010H

LINK 

SDATVAR 

NCR 

RESERVED

4- 

4 

-I-

Figure  5-2.  RSP Header Format

If  the  SDATVAR  field  is nonzero,  it  is used  as  an  offset  of  a  byte value in  the  System
Data  Area,  which  contains  the  number  of  copies  to  be  generated.  The  offset  should
indicate  a  value  that  is  set  by  the  user  during  GENCCPM.  The  TMP  RSP uses  this
feature  by  placing  the  offset  of  the  NVCNS  (Number of  Virtual Consoles)  field  into
the  SDATVAR  field. This  way,  a TMP  is generated  for  each  System Console  specified
by  the  user.  If  SDATVAR  is  0  then  the  NCP  byte  in  the  RSP  header  is  used  as  the
number  of  extra  copies  to  make.  If both  of  these fields in  the  RSP Header  are  0  then
no  extra  copies  are  made,  and  only  a  single  RSP is  created.  The  ECHO  RSP is  an
example  of  the  latter.

If  the  number  of  extra  copies  is  determined  by  GENCCPM  to  be  greater  than  0,
each  copy  of  the  RSP is  given  a  unique  copy  number. The  copy  number  is placed  in
the  NCP  field  and  the  ASCII equivalent is appended  to  the end  of the  Process  Descriptor
NAME  field  of  each  copy.  If  there  is  not  enough  space  for  the  number  in  the  PD
NAME, part  of the  PD NAME  is over  written.  For the example TMP  RSP, GENCCPM
makes  the  specified  number  of  copies  and  changes  the  NAME  field  in  each  copy  to
be TMPO,  TMP1,  TMP2,  ...,  and  sets  the NCP field to  0,  1, 2,  ...,  respectively.

M  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5-3

5.3  Multiple Copies  of  RSPs 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

5.3.1  8080 Model

When  GENCCPM  makes  copies  of  an  8080  Model  RSP,  the  CS,  DS,  ES,  and  SS
fields in  each  copy's  User  Data  Area  are  set to  the  paragraph  address  where  the RSP
is in  memory  after  loading.

5.3.2  Small  Model

If  multiple  copies  of  a  Small Model  RSP are  to  be generated, GENCCPM  copies  both
the  Code  and  Data  Groups  of  the  RSP, if the  MEM  field  of  the  Process  Descriptor  is
0.  See the  P_CREATE  system  call for  a  description  of  the  Process  Descriptor  format.
GENCCPM  sets  the  UDA fields CS to  the  Code  Segment of  the  RSP and  DS, ES and
SS to  the  Data  Segment  of the  RSP.

5.3.3  Small Model  with  Shared Code

If  a  Small Model  RSP has  a  nonzero  MEM  field  in  its  Process  Descriptor,  the  Code
Segment  is  assumed  to  be  reentrant.  When  copies  are  made  of  this type  of  RSP only
the  Data  Group  is  copied.  GENCCPM  sets  the  UDA CS field for  each  copy  to  the
paragraph  address  of  the  one  Code  Segment  for  the  RSP's.  The  DS,  ES, and  SS, in
each  copied  Data  Segment,  are  set  by  GENCCPM  to  the  paragraph  address  of  the
Data  Segment  for  that  particular  copy.

5.4  Creating  and  Initializing an RSP

An  RSP that  is  to  be  invoked  from  a  console,  or  through  the  P_CLI  system  call,
must  create  a  special  queue  called  an  RSP Command  Queue.  Such  an  RSP is called a
Command  RSP.  This  type  of  RSP  usually  performs some  initialization routine  and
then  goes  into  a  loop.  The  initialization routine consists  of  creating and  opening an
RSP Command  Queue  as well  as changing the  priority to  the  default  transient process
priority.  (Priority  values  with  regard  to  RSPs  follow.)

5-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

5.4  Creating and Initializing an RSP

The  first  step  of  the  loop  reads  a  message  from  the  RSP Command  Queue.  The
process  that  writes  the  message to  the  RSP Command  Queue  activates the  associated
RSP.  After  the  RSP  returns  from  the  Q_READ  system  call,  it  obtains  the  system
resources  it  needs,  such  as the  calling process's  console.  Typically, the  RSP process  is
assigned  the  console  process  by  the  CLI  after  the  CLI  has  succeeded  in  writing  the
command  tail  to  the  RSP  Queue.  This  is  only  true  if  the  RSP  Process  Descriptor
name  matches  the  RSP Command  Queue  name.  Refer  to  the  P_CLI  (Call  Command
Line  Interpreter) system  call  description  for  information about  how  the  CLI handles
a  command.

I 

i

When  the  RSP  completes  its  activities  for  the  given  command,  it  releases  any
system  resources  it  has  acquired,  including the  console,  and  restarts  the  loop  by
reading  from  its  RSP  Command  Queue.  A  Command  RSP is  a  single  process  and  is
a  serially reusable  resource;  in  other  words,  the  RSP acts  on  one  message at  a  time.
When  several  processes  attempt  to  invoke  a  single  Command  RSP,  they  wait  as
described  in  the  Q_READ  and  Q_CREAD  system  call  in  Section  6.  Refer  to  these
and  to  the  Q_WRITE  and  Q_CWRITE system calls for  further  details.

Note: 

it  is certainly possible to  create  RSPs that  are  invoked  differently.

The  format  of  the  RSP Command  Queue  Message  is shown  in  Figure  5-3.

Byte  OOH 

02H 

082H

PDADDRESS

COMMAND TAIL (129 bytes)

Figure  5-3.  RSP Command Queue Message

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5-5

5.4  Creating  and Initializing  an RSP 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

The  PDADDRESS  is  the  offset  relative  to  the  System  Data  Area  segment  of  the
Process  Descriptor  of  the  process  calling the  RSP.  A program  that  wants  to  invoke
an  RSP  and  is  forming  an  RSP  Command  Queue  Message,  can  find  its  Process
Descriptor  address  by  calling  the  P_PDADR  system  call.  The  COMMAND  TAIL
usually  contains  what  the  TMP  sends  to  the  CLI  minus the  command  name,  and  is
terminated  with  a  zero  byte.

When  a  command  is entered  at  a  console,  the  TMP  performs a  P_CLI system call.
The  P_CLI  system  call  attempts  to  open  a  queue that  has  the  RSP Flag on  and  has
the  same  name  as  the  command  sent  to  the  CLI.  If the  Q_OPEN  is  successful, the
P_CLI  system  call  attempts  to  assign  the  calling process's  console  to  a  process  with
the  same  name  as  the  command.  The  P_CLI  system  call  then  creates  an  RSP  Com-
mand  Queue  Message  with  the  command  tail  sent  to  the  CLI  from  the  TMP,  and
writes  it  to  the  RSP  Command  Queue  (refer  to  the  discussion  of  the  P_CLI  and
Q_WRITE  system  calls in  Section  6).  A transient program  can  use  a  Command  RSP
in  the  same  manner by writing directly to  the  appropriate  RSP Command  Queue.  An
advantage  of  using  the  P_CLI  system  call  is  that  it  looks  for  an  RSP  first  and  only
searches  on  disk  for  a  CMD  file  if the  RSP is not  found.

When  an  RSP reads  an  RSP Command  Queue  Message,  it  often  needs  information
about  the  calling process,  such as which console,  list  device, drive, or  user number to
use.  If  an  RSP  is  invoked through  the  P_CLI  system  call,  the  RSP  is  assigned  the
calling  process's  console,  but  if the  RSP Command  Queue  is written  to  directly,  the
calling  process  might  or  might  not  assign  its  console  to  the  RSP. A  Command  RSP
can  use  the  PD  address  in  the  Command  RSP Message  to  find  out  what  the  default
devices  of  the  calling process  are.  The  RSP should release  any  resources it  assigns  to
itself  when  it  is  finished.

— 
5-6

m DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

5.4  Creating and  Initializing  an RSP

The  beginning  of  the  RSP  Data  Segment has  a  fixed  format  starting  at  offset  0.
This  data  structure is the  RSP Header.  Note  that  in the 8080  Model,  the RSP Header
is also  in  the  Code Segment. After  the  RSP Header  is a Process Descriptor  starting  at
offset  01 OH. A  User  Data  Area  and  a  stack  must  also  be  within the  Data Segment,
with  the  UDA placed  at  a paragraph  boundary  relative to  the  beginning of the  Data
Segment.  If system calls assuming a  default  DMA  buffer  are  used,  a  128-byte  DMA
Buffer  must  also  exist.  The  DMA  OFFSET field in  the  User  Data  Area should be set
to  the  address  of  the  DMA  buffer.  When  the  process  is  created  by  Concurrent
CP/M-86,  the  DMA  SEGMENT  field  is  initialized  to  the  same  value  as  the  DS
register.  The  DMA  SEGMENT  and  OFFSET can  also  be  set by calling F_DMASEG
and  F_DMAOFF  once  the  RSP is running. The  beginning of  the  RSP Data Segment
is  shown  in  Figure 5-4.

PROGRAM, DATA,
AND RSP STACK

USER
DATA
AREA

PROCESS DESCRIPTOR

RSP HEADER

0140H

0040H

001 OH

DS

Figure 5-4.  RSP Data  Segment

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5*7

5.4  Creating and Initializing  an RSP 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  RSP Header  must  be  located  at  offset  zero  in  the  RSP Data  Segment, the RSP
Process  Descriptor  must  be  at  offset  01 OH, and  the  RSP User Data  Area must  begin
on  an  even paragraph  boundary.

5.4.1  The  RSP Header

As  discussed  in  Section  5.2,  the  number of  copies  made  of  an  RSP  is  dependent  on
the  values  of  the  SDATVAR  and  NCP  fields  in  the  RSP  Header.  If  no  copies  are
desired,  these  fields  must  be  zero.  As  a  convenience, when  Concurrent  CP/M-86
creates  the  RSP  process,  the  LINK  field  in  the  RSP Header  is  set  to  the  paragraph
address  of  the  System Data  Area.  The  System Data  Area can  always be  obtained  by
an  RSP or  transient  program  with  the  S_SYSDAT system call.

5.4.2  The  RSP Process Descriptor

The  RSP  Process  Descriptor  should  be  initialed  to  zeros,  except  for  the  PRIORITY, 
FLAGS,  NAME,  and  UDA  SEGMENT  fields.  The  PRIORITY field is  usually initial-
ized  to  190.  This  is higher  than  transient programs  and  TMPs  (200  and  198  respec-
tively),  but  lower  than  the  INIT  process,  which  has  a  priority  of  1. The  description
of  the  P_PRIORITY  system  call in Section  6 contains  more information about system
priority  assignments.

'—'

Starting  an  RSP  at  a  priority  of  190  ensures  that  the  RSP  is  able  to  create  and
open  an  RSP Command  Queue  before it  can  be invoked  through  a  TMP.  RSPs such
as  ECHO  usually  set  their  priority  to  200  after  creating  and  opening  their  RSP
Command  queue  and  before  attempting  to  read  from  the queue.

Note: 
there  are  no  guarantees  about  the  order  in  which  the  RSP  processes  are
created  by  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  operating  system.  If  one  RSP must  run  before
another,  it  must  have  a  higher  priority.  Such  is  the  case  when  one  RSP  uses  a 
resource  created  by  a  second  RSP; the  second  must run  (at least during  initialization)
with  a priority  higher  than  the first.

,

5-8

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

5.4  Creating  and Initializing an RSP

The  Process  Descriptor  SYS  and  KEEP  Flags  can  be  initialized  in  the  RSP  Data
Segment  (refer  to  P_CREATE  in  Section  6  for  further  flag  details). The  SYS Flag
allows  a  process  to  read  and  write  to  and  from  restricted  system  queues.  This  is
discussed  below  with  regard  to  RSP Command  Queues.  The  KEEP flag signals to  the
operating  system that  this  process  cannot  be  terminated. This  flag  is  necessary if  an
RSP  is not  to  be  terminated when  a  CTRL-C  is typed  on  a  console  being used  by  the
RSP.

The  NAME  field  of  the  RSP's  Process  Descriptor  is  8  bytes  long.  It  is  assumed  to
be  left-justified  and  padded  with  blanks on  the  right.  If an  RSP Command  Queue  is
going  to  be  used  to  invoke  the  RSP  through  the  CLI,  the  PD  must  have  the  same
upper-case  name  as  the  Command  Queue.  The  UDA field in  the  Process  Descriptor
must  be  the  offset  in  paragraphs  of  the  UDA  relative  to  the  RSP  data  segment.
GENCCPM  restores  the  UDA  field  in  the  Process  Descriptor  to  the  actual  UDA
paragraph  address  when  the  system  is loaded.

If  the  PD  field  name  is  not  the  same  as  the  Command  Queue,  the  console  is  not

assigned  to  the  RSP by the  CLI.

5.4.3  The  RSP User  Data Area

The  User  Data  Area  must  have  its  SP  field  set  to  the  offset  of  a  three-word  IRET
structure,  in  the  RSP's  Data  Segment.  The  offset  is  relative to  the  beginning of  the
Data  Segment.  The  first  of  the  three  words  is  the  offset  of  the  code  entry  point  for
the  RSP,  relative  to  the  beginning  of  the  RSP  Code  Segment.  Concurrent  CP/M-86
executes  an  IRET  instruction  to  start  the  RSP using these  three  words  for  the  IP, CS
and  Flag  registers  respectively.  The  CS value  on  the  stack  is  initialized to  be  the  CS
field of  the  UDA,  while  the  Flag value is set to  0200H  (interrupts on). The  RSP stack
must  come  immediately  before  these  three  words.

The  initial  values of  the  AX,  BX,  CX,  DX,  DI,  SI, and BP registers are taken from

the  appropriate fields in the  UDA.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5.4  Creating and Initializing an RSP 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  DMA  OFFSET field should  be set to  the  offset  of the  DMA  buffer  in the RSP's
Data  Segment.  Except  for  the  SP and  DMA  OFFSET fields, and  possibly the  AX, BX,
CX,  DX,  DI,  SI, and  BP fields, the  remainder  of  the  UDA fields should be initialized
to  0.  The  CS,  DS,  ES,  and  SS fields are  set  by  GENCCPM  as  discussed  in  Section
5.3. 

. 

. 

^

5.4.4  The  RSP Stack

The  RSP  must  reserve  space  for  its  stack,  which  is  assumed  to  lie within  the  RSP's
Data  Segment.  This  stack  must  be large  enough  to  accommodate  what  the  RSP code
will  need,  plus  four  levels  (eight  bytes)  to  handle  possible  hardware  interrupts.  We
highly  recommend  that  you  reserve  more  than  four  extra  levels of  stack.

The  SP field in  the  RSP's  UDA points  to  the  top  of this stack; the  top  contains the

three-word  IRET instruction  discussed  above.

5.4.5  The  RSP Command  Queue

The  RSP's  Command  Queue  contains  information  that  determines  when  it  begins
execution,  and  which  console  it  is  attached  to.  If  an  RSP is  to  be  accessible from  a
console  via the  TMP,  the  Command  Queue name must be in upper-case. The FLAGS
field in  the  RSP Command  Queue  Descriptor must have the  RSP bit  on.  If this flag  is
not  on,  the  CLI  will  not  write  a  message to  the  RSP Command  Queue,  and  instead
attempts  to  load  a  transient program.  The  KEEP flag should be set on  to  protect  the
RSP  QUEUE  from  inadvertent use  of  the  Q_DELETE  system call.

The  RESTRICTED  flag  (refer  to  the  Q_MAKE  system call  in  Section  6)  makes  a
QUEUE  accessible  only  by  privileged  processes.  Privileged  processes  have  the  SYS
Flag  on  in  their  Process  Descriptor.  If the  RESTRICTED  Flag is on  in  an  RSP  Com-
mand  Queue,  then  only  privileged processes  can  invoke  the  related  RSP.  A  lower- 
case  letter  in  the  RSP Command  Queue  name  and  the  RESTRICTED  Flag  provide
two  methods of  filtering  access to  an  RSP QUEUE.

^~ 

,

5-10

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

5.4  Creating and Initializing  an RSP

The  Queue  Descriptor  of  the  RSP Command  Queue  must  have  a  message  length
of  131  bytes.  The  format  of  this  message  is  shown  above.  The  number  of  messages
is  usually  1.  If  the  Queue  Descriptor  is  within  64K  bytes  of  the  beginning  of  the
System  Data  Area,  buffer  space 'for  the  Queue  Descriptor  must  be  allocated  in  the
RSP.  The  BUFFER  field  in  the  Queue  Descriptor  must  be  the  offset  of  this  buffer,
relative  to  the  beginning  of  the  RSP's  Data  Segment.  The  buffer  size  is  the  message
length  times  the  number  of  messages,  usually 131 bytes.

the  queue  buffer  should  be before the  Queue  Descriptor  within  the  RSP Data

Note: 
Segment.

An  RSP can  certainly create  other  queues  besides  the  RSP Command  Queue  used
with  Command  RSPs.  However,  any  queue  an  RSP creates  that  lies  within  64K  of
the  System  Data  Area  must  have  a  buffer  area  pointed  to  by  the  BUFFER field in  its
Queue  Descriptor.  To  be  safe,  the  buffer  should  come  before the  Queue  Descriptor
in  the  RSP's  Data  Segment.  It  is assumed  the  BUFFER field points  to  a  buffer  that  is
also  within  64K  of  the  System  Data  Area.  If  the  Queue  Descriptor  is  farther  than
64K  from  then  System  Data  Area,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  uses  buffer  space  in  the
System  Data  Area.  Refer  to  the  Q_MAKE system call in Section  6  for  further  details.

In  order  to  open  the  RSP  Command  Queue  and  subsequently  read  from  it,  a
Queue  Parameter  Block  and  its associated  buffer  must  be allocated  in the  RSP's  Data
Segment.  These  structures  are  treated  just  as  in  a  transient  process.  For  any  queues
created  by  an  RSP,  it  is  stressed  that  the  queue  buffer  areas  associated  with  the
Queue  Descriptor  and  the  Queue  Parameter  Block  are  separate,  distinct  areas  of
storage.

5.4.6  Multiple Processes  within an RSP

An  RSP can  create  child  processes  by  calling the  P_CREATE  system  call.  Note  that
if  the  Process  Descriptor  of  the  process  being  created  is  within  64K  bytes  of  the
beginning  of  the  System  Data  Area,  the  PD  structure  is used  directly by  Concurrent
CP/M-86.  Otherwise  the  PD  structure  is copied  into  the  PD table in the  System Data
Area.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

5-11

5.5  Developing and Debugging an RSP 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

5.5  Developing  and Debugging  an RSP

The  first  RSP  you  attempt  should  be  very  simple,  on  the  order  of  complexity  of
the  ECHO  RSP listed  in  Appendix  D.  New  RSPs should  be developed  and  debugged
as  if they  were  transient processes,  such  as  Concurrent  CP/M-86  CMD  utilities, then
converted  into  RSPs.

An  RSP  debugging  session  should  proceed  like  an  XIOS  debugging  session:  first
load  CP/M-86,  then  invoke  DDT-86™,  and  then  bring up  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The
Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  provides  more  information  about  running  Con-
current  CP/M-86  under  CP/M-86.

After  reading  in  the  CCPM.SYS file under  DDT-86,  find  the  RSPSEG field of  the
System  Data  Segment  (SYSDAT).  The  paragraph  address of  the  SYSDAT is found  in
the  A_BASE  field  of  the  Data  Group  Descriptor  in  the  CCPM.SYS  command  file
header.  The  CMD  header  is described in Section  3.2  and  the  Sysdat area  is described
in  the  S_SYSDAT  system call in  Section  6. The  RSPSEG field contains the  paragraph
address  of  the  Data  Segment of  the  first  RSP in  a  linked list of  the  RSPs included  by
GENCCPM.

By  using  the  Display  Memory  (D) command  of  DDT-86  to  show  memory  at  the
segment  RSPSEG,  the  name  of  the  first  RSP  can  be  identified  in  the  RSP's  Process
Descriptor.  The  LINK  field  in  the  RSP Header,  which  will  be  the  first  word  in  the
RSPSEG  segment,  is the  paragraph  value of  the  next  RSP's Data  Segment.  A zero  in
the  LINK  field  means  the  end  of  the  list  of  RSPs. Note  that  linkage information is
lost  once  Concurrent  CP/M-86  is  initialized. The  LINK  field  of  the  RSP  Header
contains  the  System Data  Segment once  an  RSP begins execution.

Once  the  RSP to  be  debugged  is  located,  the  initial code  entry  point  can  also  be
found.  As  discussed  previously,  the  SP field in  the  RSP's  UDA  is the  offset  from  the
beginning  of  the  RSP's  Data  Segment  of  the  three-word  IRET  structure.  The  first
word  of  the  IRET  structure  contains  the  initial  value of the  IP register  when  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86  creates  the  RSP process.  The  initial value of  the  CS register  is  in  the
CS  field  also  in  the  RSP's  UDA.  Once  this  is  done,  you  can  set  break  points  in  the
RSP,  similar  to  setting  break  points  in XIOS system  calls.

End  of  Section  5

5-12

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Section 6
System Calls

This  section  describes  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system  calls  in  tabular  form.  It  is
intended  both  as  an  introduction  to  the  calls  and  as  a  reference  for  use  during
programming.  You  should  be  familiar  with  the  material  in  Sections  1  through  5
before  proceeding.

The  first  table,  Table  6-1,  describes the  categories  of  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system
calls  and  their  general  uses.  Table  6-2  summarizes the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system
calls. Use it  as  a quick reference  to find the  system call you  need while programming.
The  system  calls  are  broken  down  into  functional  groups.  Immediately following is
Table  6-3,  a  cross-reference showing  the  system  calls in  numerical order.  Table  6-4
is  an  index  providing  the  page  numbers  and  figure  titles  of  commonly  used  data
structures. Table 6-5 lists the error  codes returned  in register  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-1

6  System  Calls 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Table  6-1.  System Call  Categories

Category 

Use

C_  Console  System  Calls

The Console System Calls handle I/O operations  for virtual con-
soles  on  a  character,  string,  and  line  basis,  attach  and  detach
consoles  from  processes, and  return  or  change  the  number  cor-
responding  to  the  default  virtual  console.

DEV_  Device  System  Calls

The  Device System Calls deal with  flags  and  polling in managing
system  resources.

DRV_  Disk  Drive  System  Calls

The  Disk  Drive  System  Calls manage  Concurrent  CP/M-86  log-
ical  drives.

F_  File-Access  System  Calls

The  File-Access  System  Calls  include  calls  that  operate  on files
within  a directory, calls that operate  on records  within files, and
other miscellaneous  system  calls  related  to file  I/O.

L_  List  Device  System  Calls

The  List  Device  System  Calls  write  characters  or  strings  to  the
default  list device,  attach  and  detach  the default list device  from
calling  processes, and return  or change the number  correspond-
ing to  the  default  list  device.

M_  MP/M-86.. Memory  Management  System  Calls

The  M_  Memory  Management  System  Calls  are  included  for
compatibility  with  MP/M-86. These calls allocate and free  mem-
ory segments according to the MP/M-86 segmentation  algorithm.

6-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6  System  Calls

Table  6-1.  (continued)

Category

Use

MC_  CP/M-86  Memory  Management  System Calls

The  MC_  Memory  Management System Calls allocate and  free
memory  segments  according  to  the  CP/M-86  segmentation
algorithm.

P_  Process/Program  System Calls

The  Process/Program  System Calls create and  terminate  processes,
call other  processes,  and perform other  operations  on  processes.

Q_  Queue  Management  System Calls

The  Queue  Management  System Calls create, delete, open,  read
from,  and  write  to  queues.

S_  System  Calls

The  System Calls  return  various types  of  systems data,  such  as
version  numbers  and  addresses.

T_  Time  System  Calls

The  Time  System  Calls  set  the  system  calendar  and  clock  and
return  the  time  from  them  in  hours  and  minutes  or  in  hours,
minutes,  and  seconds. 

'  '

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-3

6  System  Calls

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

Table  6-2.  Concurrent CP/M-86  System Calls

Number
Dec  Hex

Mnemonic

Definition

Console  I/O  System Calls

149  95

C  ASSIGN

146  92

C  ATTACH

162  A2

C  CATTACH

110  6E

C_DELIMIT

147  93

C_DETACH

153  99

C_GET

Assign  default  virtual  console  to
another  process.

Establish  ownership  of  the  default
virtual console to the calling process;
suspend  process  until 
console
becomes  available.

Conditionally  establish ownership of
the  default  virtual  console  by  the
calling process; return an error mes-
sage  if the  device is unavailable.

Set or  return  current  String  Output
Delimiter. Used with C_WRITESTR.

Detach  default  virtual  console  from
the calling process.

Return the virtual console number of
the calling process.

109  6D

C_MODE

Set or  return Console  mode.

6 

06

C_RAWIO

1 

01

C_READ

10 

OA

C  READSTR

Perform  Raw  mode  I/O  with  the
default  virtual console.

Read  a  character  from  the  default
virtual  console.

Read an edited line from  the  default
virtual  console.

6-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide 

6  System  Calls

Table 6-2. 

(continued)

Number 
Dec  Hex

148  94 

Mnemonic 

C_SET 

II 

OB 

C_STAT 

2 

02 

C_WRITE 

III  6F 

C_WRITEBLK 

9 

09 

C_WRITESTR 

Definition

Set or change the default virtual con-
sole  for  the  calling  process.

Obtain the input status of the default
virtual  console.

Write  a character to the default  vir-
tual  console.

Write  a specified number  (block) of
characters 
the  default  virtual
console.

to 

Write  a  string to  the  default  virtual
console  until delimiter.

Device System  Calls

131  83 

DEV_POLL 

Poll a noninterrupt-driven  device.

133  85 

DEV_SETFLAG 

Set a system flag.

132  84 

DEV_WAITFLAG 

Wait for a system flag to be set before
restoring the  current  process.

Disk  Drive System  Calls

38 

26 

DRV_ACCESS 

Indicate access  to  specified  drives.

27 

IB 

DRV_ALLOCVEC 

Get  the  address  of  the  disk  Alloca-
tion  Vector.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-5

6  System  Calls

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Number
Dec  Hex

Mnemonic

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Definition

13  OD

DRV  ALLRESET

Reset  all disk  drives.

31 

IF

DRV  DPB

48  30

DRV_FLUSH

Return the segment and offset  address
of  the  Disk  Parameter  Block  for  the
default  disk  of  the  calling  process.

internal  pending  blocking/

Write 
deblocking  data  buffers  to  disk.

39  27

DRV_FREE

Relinquish access to specified  drives.

25 

19

DRV_GET

101  65

DRV_GETLABEL

24  18

DRV_LOGINVEC

Return  the  default  drive of  the  call-
ing process.

Return  the directory  label  data  byte
for  the  specified  drive.

Return  bit  map  of  logged-in  disk
drives.

37  25

DRV_RESET

Reset  the  specified  drives.

29  ID

DRV_ROVEC

Return  bit  map  vector  of  drives  set
to  Read-Only.

14  OE

DRV_SET

Set default drive  of  calling  process.

100  64

DRV_SETLABEL

Create  or  update  a directory  label.

28  1C

DRV_SETRO

Set the  default drive to  Read-Only.

46  2E

DRV  SPACE

Return  unallocated  space  on  the
specified  drive.

6-6

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6  System Calls

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Number
Dec  Hex

Mnemonic

Definition

Disk File

System Calls

30

16

19

51

IE

10

13

33

F_ATTRIB

F_CLOSE

F_DELETE

F_DMASEG

52

34

F_DMAGET

26

1A

F_DMAOFF

Set file attributes.

Close file.

Delete file.

Set  Direct  Memory  Access  buffer
segment  address.

Return segment and offset  address of
Direct  Memory  Access  buffer.

Set the  Direct  Memory  Access  offset
address.

45

42

22

44

15

2D

2A

16

2C

OF

F_ERRMODE

Set the  BDOS Error  mode.

F_LOCK

Lock  record  within  file  opened  in
Unlocked  mode.

F_MAKE

Create file.

F_MULTISEC

Set the  BDOS Multisector  Count.

F_OPEN

Open file for  record  access.

152

98

F_PARSE

Parse  an  ASCII  string and initialize
an FCB.

ti

106

6A

F_PASSWD

Set  the  default  password. 

"

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-7

6  System  Calls

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

Number
Dec  Hex

36

24

20

33

23

17

35

18

14

21

17

11

23

12

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Definition

F_RANDREC

Set the  Random  Record field in  the
the  sequential  record
FCB  from 
position.

F_READ

Read  records sequentially.

F_READRAND

Read  random  records.

F_RENAME

Rename file.

F_SFIRST

F_SIZE

F_SNEXT

102

66

F_TIMEDATE

99

63

F_TRUNCATE

Search  for  first  matching  directory
FCB that matches the specified FCB.

Return  the  size of  a file.

Search  for  next  matching  directory
FCB that  matches  the  FCB specified
in  the  F_SFIRST  system call.

Return  file's  date  and  time  stamps
and  password  mode.

Truncate  file  to  the  specified  Ran-
dom  Record  Number.

43

32

2B

20

F_UNLOCK

Remove record  locks.

F_USERNUM

Set or return the default user number
of  the  calling  process.

21

15

F_WRITE

Write  records  sequentially.

6-8

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

6  System  Calls

Number
Dec  Hex

34 

40 

22

28

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Definition

F  WRITERAND

Write  random  records.

F  WRITEZF

Write  random  records  and  zero-fill
any  previously  unallocated  data
blocks.

103  67

F_WRITEXFCB 

Create  or  update file's XFCB.

List  Device System Calls 

;

158  9E

L_ATTACH 

161  Al

L  CATTACH

159  9F

L  DETACH

164  A4

L  GET

160  AO

L  SET

5 

05

L  WRITE

Establish  ownership  of  the  default
list device by the calling process; sus-
pend  the  process  until the  device is
available.

Conditionally  establish ownership  of
the  default  list  device by  the calling
process; return error code if the device
is unavailable.

Relinquish  ownership  of the  default
list  device.

Return the default list device number
of  the  calling process.

Change the default list device for the
calling process.

Write a character  to  the  default  list
device.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-9

6  System  Calls

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

Number
Dec  Hex

112  70

Table 6-2. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Definition

L  WRITEBLK

Write the  specified  number  of  char-
acters (block) to the default list device.

MP/M  Compatible  Memory  Allocation  System Calls

128  80
129  81

M_ALLOC
same  as  128

Allocate the  memory  segment
between  the  sizes  specified  in  the
Memory Parameter Block to the call-
ing  process.

130  82

M_FREE 

; 

Free the  specified memory  segment.

CP/M  Compatible  Memory  Allocation  System Calls

56 

38

MC_ABSALLOC 

54 

36

MC  ABSMAX

58 

3A

MC  ALLFREE

55 

37

MC  ALLOC

57 

39

MC  FREE

Allocate a specified amount of RAM,
as above,  but  beginning at a  specific
address.

Allocate  the  maximum  amount  of
RAM available at a specified  address.

•  i

Free  all memory  owned  by the  call-
ing  process.

Allocate a segment of RAM, as spec-
ified  in  the  Memory  Control  Block,
to the calling process. 

"'

Free an area of RAM  beginning at a
specified  address,  and  extending  to
the  end  of  the  previously-allocated
memory  area.

6-10

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

6  System  Calls

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Number
Dec  Hex

53 

35

Mnemonic

MC  MAX

Definition

Allocate  the  maximum  amount  of
RAM  available in the  system.

Process/Program  System  Calls

157  9D

P  ABORT

47 

2F

P  CHAIN

150  96

P  CLI

Terminate a process specified by name
or  Process  Descriptor  address.

Load, initialize, and jump to the pro-
gram  specified in the  DMA  buffer.

Interpret  and  execute  the  specified
command  line by calling  Command
Line  Interpreter  (CLI).

144  90

P_CREATE

Create  a  subprocess. 

?<•!

141  8D

P  DELAY

142  8E

P  DISPATCH

59 

3B

P  LOAD

156  9C

P  PDADR

Suspend  the  calling  process  for  a
specified  number  of  system  clock
ticks. 

•>

Force  a  dispatch  operation;  give  up
the  CPU  resource  to  the  highest
priority  process  ready to  run.

Load the specified  CMD file in mem-
ory;  return  its  base  page  segment
address.

Return  the  address  of  the  Process
Descriptor  of the  calling  process.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-11

6  System Calls

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Number
Dec  Hex

145  91

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Definition

P_PRIORITY

Set the priority of the calling process.

151  97

P  RPL

Invoke a system call from  a Resident
Procedure  Library.

143  8F

P  TERM

Terminate  the  calling process.

0 

00

P  TERMCPM

Terminate  the  calling process.

Queue  System Calls

138  8A

Q_CREAD

140  8C

Q_CWRITE

Conditionally  read  a  message  from
a  system  queue; return  error  code if
a  message  is not  available.

Conditionally  write  a  message  to  a
system  queue;  return  an  error  code
if  space  is not  available.

136  88

Q_DELETE

Delete  a  system  queue.

134  86

Q_MAKE

Create  a  system  queue.

135  87

Q_OPEN

137  89

Q_READ

139  8B

Q_WRITE

Open  a system queue for  subsequent
queue  operations.

Read a message  from  a system queue;
suspend  calling  process  until  mes-
sage  is  available.

Write  a message to  a system  queue;
suspend  calling  process  until  space
becomes  available.

6-12

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6  System  Calls

Table  6-2. 

(continued)

Number
Dec  Hex

Mnemonic

Definition

System  System  Calls

12  OC

S  BDOSVER

50 

32

S  BIOS

163  A3

S  OSVER

107  6B

S  SERIAL

154  9A

S  SYSDAT

Return  BDOS  version  number,  CPU
and  operating  system  type.

Call  specified  CP/M-86  BIOS  char-
acter  I/O  routine.

Return  type  and  version  number of
Concurrent  CP/M-86.

Return 
system  serial  number.

the  Concurrent  CP/M-86

Return  address  of  the  System  Data
Segment  (Sysdat)

Time  System  Calls

105  69

T  GET

155  9B

T  SECONDS

104  68

T  SET

Obtain  the system calendar and  clock,
hours  and  minutes  only.

Return current system date and time;
hours, minutes,  seconds.

Set internal system calendar and  clock
to  specified  value.

'El  DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-13

6.1  System  Call  Summary

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

6.1  System Call Summary

Table  6-3  lists  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system calls  in  summary form,  including
the  parameters  a  process  must  pass  when  calling the  system  call,  and  the  values  the
system  call returns to  the  process.

Table  6-3.  System Call Summary

Mnemonic

Dec

Hex

C  ASSIGN
C  ATTACH
C  CATTACH
C  DELIMIT
C  DETACH
C  GET
C  MODE
C  SET
C  RAWIO
C  READ
C  READSTR
C  STAT
C  WRITE
C  WRITEBLK
C_WRITESTR

DEV  POLL
DEV  SETFLAG
DEV_WAITFLAG

DRV  ACCESS
DRV  ALLOCVEC
DRV  ALLRESET
DRV  DPB
DRV  FLUSH

149
146
162
110
147
153
109
148
6
1
10
11
2
111
9

131
133
132

38
27
13
31
48

95
92
A2
6E
93
99
6D
94
6
1
A
B
2
6F
9

83
85
84

26
IB
D
IF
30

Input
Parameters

DX  =  .ACB
none
none
DX  =  Out  Delim
none
none
DX  =  Con  Mode
DL  =  Console
see  def
none
DX  = 
none
DL  =  char
DX  =  .CHCB
.Buffer
DX  = 

.Buffer

DL  =  Device
DL  =  Flag
DL  =  Flag

Returned  Values

AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
AX  =  Rtn  Code
AL  =  Out Delim
none
AL  =  con #
AX  =  Con  Mode
none
see  def
AL  =  char
see  def
AL  =  00/01
none
none
none

none
AX  =  Rtn  Code
AX  =  Rtn  Code

DX  =  drive Vect
none
none
none
none

none
ES:AX  =  Alloc  Addr
see  def
ES: AX  =  DPB  Addr
see  def

6-14

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6.1  System  Call  Summary

Table  6-3. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Dec  Hex

DRV_FREE 
DRV_GET 
DRV_GETLABEL 
DRV_LOGINVEC 
DRV_RESET 
DRV_ROVEC 
DRV_SET 
DRV_SETLABEL 
DRV_SETRO 
DRV_SPACE 

F_ATTRIB 
F_CLOSE 
F_DELETE 
F_DMAGET 
F_DMAOFF 
F_DMASEG 
F_ERRMODE 
F_LOCK 
F_MAKE 
F_MULTISEC 
F_OPEN 
F_PARSE 
F_PASSWD 
F_RANDREC 
F_READ 
F_READRAND 
F_RENAME 
F_SFIRST 
F_SIZE 
F_SNEXT 
F_TIMEDATE 
—
F  TRUNCATE 

39 
27
19
25 
101  65
18
24 
25
37 
ID
29 
14 
E
100  64
1C
28 
2E
46 

IE
30 
10
16 
13
19 
34
52 
1A
26 
33
51 
2D
45 
2A
42 
16
22 
2C
44 
15 
F
152  98
106  6A
24
36 
14
20 
21
33 
17
23 
11
17 
23
35 
12
18 
102  66
63
99 

Input
Parameters

DX  =  drive Vect
none
DX  =  Disk #
none
DX  =  drive Vect
none
DL  =  Disk Number
DX  =  .FCB
none
DL  =  Disk #

,-

DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB 
none
DX  =  .DMA
DX  =  .DMA Seg
see  def
DX  =  .FCB  A.
DX  =  .FCB
DL =  # of Sectors
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .PFCB
DX  =  .Password
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
DX  =  .FCB
none 
DX  =  .XFCB
DX  =  .FCB

;'

Returned  Values

none
AL  =  Cur  Disk#
AL  =  Label Data
AX  =  Login Vect.
AL  =  Err  Code
AX  =  R/O Vect.
see  def
AL  =  Dir  Code
see  def
see  def

see def
AL  =  Dir  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
ES:AX  =  DMA Addr
none
none
none
AL  =  Err  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
AL  =  Rtn  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
see  def
none
rO, rl, r2
AL  =  Err  Code
AL  =  Err  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
rO, rl,  r2
AL  =  Dir  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
see  def

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-15

1  System  Call  Summary

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Table  6-3. 

(continued)

Mnemonic

Dec

Hex

Input
Parameters

Returned  Values

F  UNLOCK
F  USERNUM
F  WRITE
F  WRITERAND
F  WRITEXFCB
F_WRITEZF

L  ATTACH
L  CATTACH
L  DETACH
L  GET
L  SET
L  WRITE
L_WRITEBLK

M  ALLOC
M  ALLOC
M  FREE
MC  ABSALLOC
MC  ABSMAX
MC  ALLFREE
MC  ALLOC
MC  FREE
MC_MAX

P  ABORT
P  CHAIN
P  CLI
P  CREATE
P  DELAY
P  DISPATCH

43
32
21
34
103
40

158
161
159
164
160
5
112

128
129
130
56
54
58
55
57
53

157
47
150
144
141
142

2B
20
15
22
67
28

9E
Al
9F
A4
AO
5
70

80
81
82
38
36
3A
37
39
35

9D
2F
96
90
8D
8E

DX  =
see  def
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =

.FCB

.FCB
.FCB
.XFCB
.FCB

none
none
none
none
DL  =
DL  =
DX  =

DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
none
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =

DX  =
see  def
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
none

List#
char
.CHCB

.MPB
.MPB
.MCB
.MCB

.MCB
.MCB
.MCB

.ABP

.CLBUF
.PD
#ticks

AL  =  Err  Code
see def
AL  =  Err  Code
AL  =  Err  Code
AL  =  Dir  Code
AL  =  Err  Code

none
AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
AL  =  list #
none
none
none

AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
see  def
see  def
none
see  def
see  def
see def

AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
none
none
none
none

6-16

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

6.1  System Call Summary

Table  6-3.  (continued)

Mnemonic

Dec

Hex

Input
Parameters

Returned  Values

P  LOAD
P  PDADR
P  PRIORITY
P  RPL
P  TERM
P_TERMCPM

Q  CREAD
Q  CWRITE
Q  DELETE
Q  MAKE
Q  OPEN
Q  READ
Q_WRITE

S  BDOSVER
S  BIOS
S  OSVER
S  SERIAL
S_SYSDAT

T  GET
T  SECONDS
T  SET

59
156
145
151
143
0

138
140
136
134
135
137
139

12
50
163
107
154

105
155
104

3B
9C
91
97
8F
0

8A
8C
88
86
87
89
8B

C
32
A3
6B
9A

69
9B
68

DX  =
none
DL  =
DX  =
DL  =
none

DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =
DX  =

none
DX  =
none
DX  =
none

.FCB

Priority
.CPB
Term.  Code

AX  =  B.P.Seg
ES:AX  =  PD Addr
none
AX  =  result
AX  =  Rtn  Code
AX  =  Rtn  Code

.QPB
.QPB
.QPB
.QD
.QPB
.QPB
.QPB

.BD

.serialnmb

AX  =  Rtn  Code
AX  =  Rtn  Code
AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
AX  =  Rtn  Code
none
none

AX=  Version*
AX  =  BIOS rtn
AX  =  Version #
serial  nmb set
ES:AX  =  Sys Data Addr

DX  =
DX  =
DX  =

.TOD
TOD
TOD

none
none
none

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

6-17

6.1  System  Call  Summary 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Note: 

system calls 3,  4,  7, and  8 are not  supported  by Concurrent CP/M-86.

Conventions  used in Table  6-3:

=  Absolute 
=  Address 
=  Base Page 
=  ASCII  Character 

Abs 
Addr 
BP 
Char 
Comm  =  Command 
Con 
Cond.  =  Conditional 
Ct 
Dir 
Err 
# 

=  Count 
=  Directory 
=  Error 
=  Number 

=  Console 

=  Process 
=  Process Descriptor
=  Record

,.

Pswd  =  Password 
Proc 
PD 
Rec 
Reloc  =  Relocatable 
Rqst 
Rtn 
Sp 
Spec.  =  Specified
Sys 
Term.  =  Termination
Vect 

=  Request
=  Return
=  Space

=  System

=  Vector

«

-t

Upper-case  mnemonics  refer  to  Data  Structures; see the  function  definition.  A "."
before  a  Data  Structure  means  the  byte  offset  of  the  Data  Structure.  A Return  Code
is  either  0  for  success  or  OFFFFH  to  indicate failure.  When  the  Return Code  in  AX
is  OFFFFH, CX  is  the  Error  Code  (see Table  6-5).  An  error  code  returned in  AL  is
specific  to  the  BDOS system call that  was made.

Table  6-4.  Data  Structures  Index

Figure

Title

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Virtual/Physical

Environments

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Functional  Modules

FCB - File Control  Block
Directory  Label Format
XFCB  - Extended  File  Control  Block
Directory  Record  with  SFCB
SFCB  Subfields
Disk  System Reset

1-1

1-2

2-1
2-2
2-3
2-4
2-5
2-6

6-18

Page

1-1

1-3

2-11
2-19
2-21
2-25
2-26
2-45

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

6.1  System  Call  Summary

Figure

Title

Table  6-4. 

(continued)

3-1
3-2
3-3

4-1
4-2
4-3
4-4

5-1
5-2
5-3
5-4

6-1
6-2
6-3
6-4
6-5
6-6
6-7
6-8
6-9
6-10
6-11
6-12
6-13
6-14
6-15

CMD  File Header  Format 
Group  Descriptor  Format 
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Base Page Values 

; -[ 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  8080  Memory  Model 
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Small Memory  Model 
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Compact  Memory Model 
Intel  Hexadecimal  File Formats 

8080  and  Small  RSP Models
RSP Header  Format
RSP Command  Queue  Message
RSP Data  Segment

Structure

ACB - Assign Control  Block
Console  Buffer  Format
Drive,  R/O, or  Login Vector
DPB - Disk  Parameter  Block
Disk  Free Space Field Format
PFCB - Parse Filename Control Block
MCB  - Memory  Control  Block 
MPB - Memory  Parameter Block 
MFPB  -  M_FREE  Parameter Block 
APB  - Abort  Parameter Block 
CLI  Command  Line  Buffer
PD - Process  Descriptor
UDA  - User Data Area
CPB - Call Parameter Block
QPB - Queue  Parameter Block

v  *  4

• H

.- ;
! ;i
*  M
Hi
i  • j

k. 
r- 

I; 

kl 

Mil; 

Page

- 
3-2
.  3-3
.  3-5

-  4-3
4-5
4-6
4-12

• 

. 

5-2
5-3
5-5
5-7

6-22
6-34
6-43
6-50
6-66
6-91
6-135
6-136
6-139
6-146

6-150

6-154
6-159
6-167
6-171

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-19

6.1  System  Call  Summary 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Table  6-5.  CX  Error  Code  Reports

Dec

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Hex

OOH
01H
02H
03H
04H
05H
06H
07H
08H
09H
OAH
OCH
ODH
OEM
OFH
12H
13H
14H
15H
16H
17H
18H
19H
1AH
1BH
1CH
1DH
1EH
1FH
20H
21H

Error  Report

No error
System  call  not implemented
Illegal  system call number
Cannot find memory
Illegal flag number
Flag overrun
Flag underrun
No  unused  Queue  Descriptors
No  free  queue  buffer
Cannot find queue
Queue  in  use
No  free  process  descriptors
No  queue access
Empty queue
Full queue
No  unused Memory  Descriptors
Illegal  console  number
No  Process  Descriptor  match
No  console  match
No  CLI  process
Illegal  disk number
Illegal  filename
Illegal  filetype
Character  not  ready
Illegal  memory  descriptor
Bad  return  from  BDOS  load
Bad return  from  BDOS read
Bad  return  from  BDOS  open
Null  command
Not  owner  of  resource
No  CSEG  in load file

6-20

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

6.1  System Call  Summary

Dec

34
35
36
37
38
40
41

Hex

22H
23H
24H
25H
26H
28H
29H

Table  6-5. 

(continued)

Error  Report

Root

Process  Descriptor  exists on  Thread
Could  not  terminate process
Cannot  attach  to  process
Illegal  list  device number 
Illegal  password
External  termination  occurred
Fixup  error  upon  load

,

6.2  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Calls

This  section  presents  detailed  information  on  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system
calls.  Read  the  entire  section  through  before  attempting  to  use  the  system  calls  in  a
program,  as  many of  them  interact  with  one  another.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-21

C  ASSIGN

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

6.2.1  Console I/O  System Calls

C  ASSIGN

i  r

Assign  Default  Console  Device
To  Another  Process

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

095H  (149)
ACB  Address  -  Offset
ACB Address  -  Segment

0  if assign  'OK'
OFFFFH  on  Failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

oo

04

CMS  MATCH

PD

t ^^^^^^^^^^ i

^^^^^^^^~  T

NAME

Figure 6-1.  ACB - Assign Control  Block

6-22

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  ASSIGN

Field

CNS

MATCH

PD

Table  6-6.  ACB Field  Definitions

Definitions

Console  to assign

Boolean;  if  OFFH,  the  process  being  assigned  the  console  must
have the  CNS  as its default  console for a successful  Assign. IF OH,
no  check  is made.

Process  ID  of  the  process  being assigned the  console.  If this field
is  zero,  a  search  is  made  of  the  Thread  list  for  a  process  whose
name  is NAME.  This field must be either zero or  a  valid  Process
ID.  If this value is not  a valid PD,  an  error  occurs.

NAME

8-byte process name to  search for. An error occurs if a process by
this  name does  not  exist.

The  C_ASSIGN  system  call  directly  assigns  the  specified  console  to  a  specified
process.  This  system  call  overrides the  normal  mechanism of  the  C_ATTACH  and
C_DETACH  system  calls. The  system  call  returns an  error  code  if  a  process  other
than  the  calling  process  owns  the  console.  The  system  call  ignores  other  processes
waiting to  attach  to  the  specified  console,  and  they  continue to  wait until the current
owner  either calls  the  C_DETACH  system call, or terminates.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of error codes  returned in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-23

C  ATTACH

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  ATTACH

Attach  Default  Console
To  Calling Process

Entry Parameters:

Register  CL:  092H  (146)

The  C_ATTACH  system  call  attaches  the  default  console  to  the  calling process. If
the  console  is  already  owned  by  the  calling process  or  if  it  is not  owned  by  another
process, the  C_ATTACH system  call immediately returns with  ownership  established
and  verified.  If another  process  owns  the  console,  the  calling  process  waits  until  the
console  becomes  available.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-24

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

C  CATTACH

C  CATTACH

Conditionally  Attach  To The
Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OA2H  (162)

Returned Values:
Register  AX:

KX:
CX:

0  if attach  'OK'
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  C_CATTACH  system  call  attaches  the  default  console  of  the  calling process

only  if the  console  is currently  unattached.

If  the  console  is  currently  attached  to  another  process,  the  system  call  returns  a
value  of  OFFH  indicating  that  the  console  could  not  be  attached.  The  system  call
returns  a  value  of  0  to  indicate  that  either  the  console  is  already  attached  to  the
process  or  that  it was  unattached  and  a  successful  attach  operation  was  made.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-25

C  DELIMIT

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

C  DELIMIT

Set or  Return  Output  Delimiter

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DL:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:

06EH  (110)
OFFFFH  (get) or
Output  Delimiter (set)

Output  Delimiter  or
(no  value)
Same  as  AL

A  program  can  set  or  interrogate  the  current  Output  Delimiter  by  calling  C_DE-
LIMIT.  If  register  DX  =  OFFFFH,  then  the  current  Output  Delimiter  is returned  in
register  AL.  Otherwise,  C_DELIMIT  sets  the  Output  Delimiter  to  the  value in  regis-
ter  DL.

C_DELIMIT  sets  the  string  delimiter  for  C_WRITESTR.  When  a  new  process  is
created,  the  default  delimiter  value  is set  to  a  dollar  sign,  $.  The  default  delimiter  is
not  inherited  from  the parent process.

6-26

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  DETACH

C  DETACH

Detach  Default  Console
From  Calling Process

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:

093H  (147)

Returned Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  if detach  'OK'
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  C_DETACH  system call detaches the  default  console  from  the  calling  process.
If  the  default  console  is  not  attached  to  the  calling process,  no  action  is  taken.  If
other  processes  are  waiting  to  attach  to  the  console,  the  process  with  the  highest
priority  attaches  the  console.  If there  is more  than  one process  with  the  same  priority
waiting  for  the  console,  it  is  given  to  the  queue  writing  processes  on  a  first-come,
first-serve basis.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-27

C  GET

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

C  GET

Return  The  Calling  Process's
Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

099H  (153)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

Console  number
Same  as AL

The  C__GET  system  call  returns  the  default  console  number of the  calling process.

6-28

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

C  MODE

C  MODE

Set or  Return  Console  mode

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:

06DH (109)
OFFFFH  (get) or
Console  mode (Set)

Returned Values:
Register  AX:

BX:

Console  mode or
(no value)
Same  as AX

A process  can  set or  interrogate  the  Console  mode by calling CJMODE. If register
DX  =  OFFFFH, then  the  current  Console  mode  is  returned  in  register  AX.  Other-
wise,  C_MODE sets the  Console  mode  to  the  value contained  in  register DX. 

,

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-29

C_MODE 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  Console  mode  is  a  16-bit  system  parameter  that  determines  the  action  of
certain  Console  I/O  functions. Note  that  the  Console  mode  bits are  numbered  from
right  to  left.  The  Console  mode is set to  zero  when  a new process  is created; it is not
inherited  from  its parent. The  definition  of  the  Console  mode is

bit  0  =  1-  CTRL-C  only status  for function  11.
=  0 - Normal  status for  function  11.

bit  1  =  1-  Disable stop  scroll,  CTRL-S, start  scroll, CTRL-Q,  support.

=  0 - Enable stop  scroll,  start  scroll  support.

bit  2  =  1-  Raw console output  mode.  Disables tab  expansion for functions  2,

9,  and  111. Also disables printer echo,  CTRL-P,  support.

=  0 - Normal  console output  mode. 

j

bit  3  =  1-  Disable  CTRL-C  program  termination
=  0  - Enable CTRL-C  program termination

bit  7 = 1- Disable CTRL-O  console  output  byte bucket
=  0 - Enable CTRL-O  console output  byte bucket

—— 
6-30

m  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  RAWIO

C  RAWIO

Perform  Direct  Console  I/O
With  Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

06H  (6)
OFFH

(Input/
Status)  or
OFEH
(Status)  or
OFDH
(Input)  or
Character (Output)

Returned Values:
Register  AL:

(Input/Status)

=  OH (No  Character)
=  Character

(Status)

=  OH - No  Character
=  OFFH  - Ready

(Input)

=  Character 

,

(Output)

No  return value

BL:

Same  as AL

The  C_RAWIO  system call  allows  the  calling process  to  do  Raw  console  I/O to its
default  console. Concurrent  CP/M-86  verifies  that  the calling process  owns  its default
console  before  allowing  any I/O.

A process  calls the  C_RAWIO  system  call by passing  one  of  three  different  values

shown  in Table  6-7.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-31

C  RAWIO

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Value

OFFH

OFEH

OFDH

Table  6-7.  C_RAWIO  Calling Values

Description

Console input  status  command  (if no  character  is ready,  a  OOH  is
returned,  else the  character  is returned.)

Console  status  command  (on  return,  register AL contains OOH if
no  character  is ready;  otherwise  it contains  OFFH.)

Console  input command  (if no  character is ready, the calling process
waits  until  one  is typed.)  Input characters  are  not  echoed  to  the
screen.

ASCII
character

If  the  parameter  is less than OFDH, system call  6 assumes register
DL contains  a valid  ASCII character  and  sends  it to  the  console.

The  C_RAWIO  system  call places the  calling process  in  Raw  mode.  The  CTRL-C,
CTRL-P,  CTRL-S,  and  CTRL-O  charactes  are not  acted  on  by the PIN  (Physical Input
Process)  but  are  passed  on  to  the  calling process when  C_RAWIO is  used.

Note: 
virtual  console  then  performs  a  C_RAWIO  call, the  CTRL-S  state  is reset.

if  the  virtual  console  is  in  CRTL-S  mode,  and  the  process  that  owns  the

6-32

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

C  READ

C  READ

Read  A Character From
The  Default  Console

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:

01H  (1)

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

Character
Same  as  AL

The  C_READ  system  call  reads  a  character  from  the  default  console  of  the calling
process.  Before  attempting the  read,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  internally  verifies  the  own-
ership  of  the  console.  If the  calling process  does  not  own  the  console,  it relinquishes
the  CPU  resource  until  the  calling  process  can  attach  to  the  console.  Typically, a
process  that  is created  through  the  P_CLI  system  call  owns  its  default  console  when
it  begins  execution.

C_READ  echoes  graphic  characters  read  from  the  console.  This  includes the  car-
riage  return,  line-feed, and  backspace  characters.  It expands  tab  characters  (CTRL-I)
in  columns  of  eight  characters.

C_READ  ignores  the  termination  character  (CTRL-C) if the  calling process  cannot
terminate  (refer  to  the  P_TERM  system  call).  C_READ  does  not  return  until a char-
acter  is typed  on  the  console.  The  system suspends  the  calling process  until a  charac-
ter  is  ready.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-33

C  READSTR

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  READSTR

Read  An  Edited  Line From  The
Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

OAH  (10)
BUFFER  Address  -  Offset
BUFFER  Address  - Segment

The  C_READSTR  system  call  reads  characters  from  the  calling process's  default
console  and  places  them  into  the  specified buffer.  The  format  of  the  buffer  is  shown
in  Figure  6-2.  C_READSTR  performs  line-editing system calls on  the  line  as  it  is read
from  the  console;  it  completes  a  line  and  returns  upon  receiving a  terminator  char-
acter  from  the  console  or  when  the  maximum  number of  characters is reached.  As in
the  C_READ  system  call,  C_READSTR  echoes  all  graphic  characters  read  from  the
console.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  verifies  that  the  calling process  owns  its  default  con-
sole  before  allowing  I/O  to  begin.

MAX 

INCHAR

CHARACTERS  ...

Figure  6-2.  Console  Buffer Format

MAX  + 2

6-34

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

C_READSTR

Field 

MAX 

NCHAR 

Table  6-8.  Console  Buffer  Field Definition

Definition

Maximum  number  of  characters  that  can  be read  into  the
buffer.  This  value  must  be  initialized  before  calling  the
C_READSTR  system  call.

Actual  number  of  characters  read  into  the  buffer  as filled
in  by  the  C_READSTR  system call.

CHARACTERS 

Actual  characters  read  from  the  console  as filled in  by  the
C_READSTR  system  call.

C_READSTR  recognizes  a  number  of  special  characters  used  in  editing  the  input

line,  as  well as  a  set of  special  characters  that  actually control  the  calling  process.

Table  6-9.  C_READSTR  Line-editing  Characters

Character 

Function

RUB/DEL

(CTRL-E)

Removes  the  last character  from  the  line  and  echoes  it.

Echoes  new  line,  a  carriage  return  (CTRL-M),  and  a line-feed
(CTRL-J),  to  the  screen  but  does  not  affect  the  line  buffer.

BACKSPACE  (CTRL-H)

Removes  the  last  character  from  the  line  and  backspaces  over
that  character.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-35

C  READSTR

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Table 6-9. 

(continued)

Character

Function

TAB  (CTRL-I)

Echoes  enough  spaces  to  place the  next  character  position  at a
tab  stop.  Tab  stops  are  fixed  at  every eighth  character  of  the
physical  line.

LINE  FEED  (CTRL-J)

Terminates  the  input  line. The  C_READSTR  system call  does
not  echo a terminating character, nor does it place the character
in  the  line  buffer.

RETURN  (CTRL-M)

Terminates  the  input line.

REDRAW (CTRL-R)

Retypes  the  current line after  echoing  a  new line.

(CTRL-U)

(CTRL-X)

Removes  all  of  the  current  line  from  the  line  buffer,  echoes  a
new  line, and  starts  all over again.

Removes  all of  the  current  line from  the  line buffer  and  echoes
enough  backspaces  to  return  to the beginning of the  line.

6-36

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  SET

C  SET

Set The  Calling  Process's
Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

Returned  Values:
AX:

KX:
CX:

094H  (148)
Console  Number

0  if successful
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  C_SET  system  call  changes  the  calling process's  default  console  to  the  value
specified.  If  the  console  number  specified  is  not  one  supported  by  this  particular
implementation  of  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  system  call  returns  an  error  code,  and
does not  change  the  default  console.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-37

C  STAT

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

CSTAT

Obtain  The  Status Of  The
Default  Console

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:

OBH (11)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:

01H  character ready
OOH  not  ready
Same  as AL

The  C_STAT  system call  checks to  see if  a  character has  been typed  at  the logical
console  (CONIN:).  If  the  calling process  is  not  attached  to  its  default  console,  the
C_STAT  system  call  causes  a  dispatch  to  occur  and  return  OOH (the  Not  Ready
condition).

This  system  call  sets  the  console  to  the  Nonraw  mode,  allowing  recognition  of
special  control  characters  such  as  the  terminate character, CTRL-C.  Use C_RAWIO
to  obtain  console  status in Raw  mode.

if  bit  0  is  set  in  the  console  mode  word,  using  the  C_MODE  function  call,

Note: 
C_STAT only  returns  AL  =  01H when  a CTRL-C  is typed  on  the  default  console.

6-38

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

C  WRITE

C  WRITE

Write  A Character To  The
Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

02H  (2)
ASCII  character

The  C_WRITE  system  call  writes  the  specified  character  to  the  calling  process's
default  console.  As  in  the  C_READ  system  call,  Concurrent  CP/M-86  verifies  that
the  calling  process  owns  its  default  console  before  performing the  operation.  On
output,  C_WRITE  expands  tabs  in  columns  of eight  characters.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-39

C  WRITEBLK

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

C  WRITEBLK

Send  Specified  String To  CONOUT:

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  06FH  (111)

DX:  CHCB Address

C_WRITEBLK  sends  the  character  string located  by  the  Character  Control  Block,
CHCB,  addressed  in  register  pair  DX  to  the  logical console,  CONOUT:.  If the  Con-
sole  mode  is in  the  Default state  C_WRITEBLK  expands  tab  characters,  CTRL-I,  in
columns  of  eight  characters.

f 

• •

The  CHCB format is

bytes  0  -  1 :  Offset  of character string
bytes  2 - 3 :  Segment of character  string
bytes  4  - 5  :  Length of character string to print

6-40

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

C  WRITESTR

C  WRITESTR

Print  An  ASCII String
To  The  Default  Console

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

09H  (9)
STRING  Address -  Offset
STRING  Address - Segment

The  C_WRITESTR  system  call  prints  an  ASCII  string  starting  at  the  indicated
string  address  and  continuing until  it  reaches  a  dollar  sign  ($) character  (024H;  $ is
the  default  string  delimiter,  and  can  be  changed  by  the  C_DELIMIT  system  call).
C_WRITESTR  writes  this  string to  the  calling process's  default  console.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  verifies  that  the  calling process  owns  the console  before writ-
ing  the  string.  C_WRITESTR  sets  the  console  to  a  Nonraw  state  and  expands  tabs
in  columns of  eight  characters,  as  does  the  C_WRITE system call.

Use the  C_WRITESTR  system  call  whenever possible,  rather  than  the  single-char-
acter  system  calls.  The  CPU  overhead  involved in  handling the  first  character  is  the
same  as  that  for  a  single-character  system  call,  but  subsequent  characters  require  as
little  as  one-fifth  the  CPU  overhead.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-41

DEV  POLL

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6.2.2  Device System Calls

DEV  POLL

Poll  A Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

083H  (131)
Device Number

0  on success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  DEV_POLL  system  call  is used  by the  XIOS  to  poll  noninterrupt-driven devices.
It should  be used  whenever  the  XIOS  is waiting  for  a noninterrupt  event. The  calling
process  relinquishes the  CPU  and  allows  Concurrent  CP/M-86  to  poll  the  device  at
every  dispatch.  The  XIOS  contains  routines  for  each  polling  device  number.  These
routines  are  called  through  the  DEV_POLL  system call, and  they  return  whether  the
device  is  ready  or  not.  When  the  device  is  ready,  DEV_POLL  restores  the  calling
process  to  the  RUN  state  and  returns.  Upon  return,  the  calling process  knows  the
device  is ready.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes returned  in  CX.

6-42

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DEV  SETFLAG

DEV  SETFLAG

Set A System Flag

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

085H  (133)
Flag  Number

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  DEV_SETFLAG  system  call  is used  by  interrupt  routines  to  notify  the  system
that  a  logical  interrupt  has  occurred.  A process  waiting  for  this  flag  is  placed  back
into  the  RUN  state.  If there  are  no  processes  waiting,  then  the  next  process  to  wait
for  this  flag  returns  successfully  without  relinquishing the  CPU.  The  system  call
detects  an  error  if  the  flag  has  already  been  set,  and  no  process  has  done  a
DEV_WAITFLAG  call to  reset  it.

Note: 
if  a  process  waiting  for  a  specific  flag  to  be  set  is  aborted,  the  next
DEV_SETFLAG  call  is  ignored  and  OFFFFH is  returned  in  AX.  If  the  latter  case  is
possible,  the  interrupt  handler  should  continue  to  set  call  DEV_SETFLAG  until  it
successfully  sets  the flag IP, and  AX  =  0 on  return.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-43

DEV  WAITFLAG

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DEV  WAITFLAG

Wait  For  A System  Flag

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

084H  (132)
Flag  Number

Returned Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  DEV_WAITFLAG  system  call  is  used  by  a  process  to  wait  for  an  interrupt.
The process  relinquishes  the  CPU until  an interrupt  routine  calls the  DEV_SETFLAG
system  call,  which  places  the  waiting process  in  the  RUN  state.  When  DEV_WAIT-
FLAG  returns  to  the  calling  process,  the  interrupt  has  occurred,  or  an  error  has
occurred.  An  error  occurs  when  a  process  is  already  waiting  for  the  flag.  If  the  Flag
was  set before DEV_WAITFLAG  was  called,  the  routine returns successfully  without
relinquishing  the  CPU.  This  routine  is meant  to  be  used  by  the  XIOS.  The  mapping
between  types  of  interrupts  and  flag  numbers  is  maintained  in  the  XIOS,  although
Concurrent  CP/M-86  reserves  flags  0,  1, 2,  and  3  for  system use.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-44

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

DEV_WAITFLAG

6.2.3  Disk  Drive  System Calls

The  Drive  Vector,  Read-Only  Vector,  and  Login  Vectors  are  data  structures  refer-
enced  or  returned  by  several  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Disk  Drive  system  calls.  The
Drive,  R/O,  or  Login  Vectors  are  16-bit  values specifying  one  or  more  drives,  where
the  least  significant  bit  corresponds  to  drive A, and  the  high-order  bit  corresponds  to
the  sixteenth  drive,  labeled  P.  The  format  of  the  Drive,  R/O,  and  Login  Vectors  is
illustrated  below:

+ - + - -»• - + - + - + — + — + — + — + — -i- — t - + —

DRV

PO
+

N

B IT 

15 

14 

13 

L

M

KJ 

E
+ - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + - + -
12 

32 

11 

10 

BA

8 

9 

1 

G

D

H

C

6

4

5

7

F

I 

0

Figure 6-3.  Drive,  R/O,  or Login  Vector Structure

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-45

DRV  ACCESS

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  ACCESS

Access  Specified  Disk  Drives

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:

026H  (38)
Drive  Vector

Returned  Values:
AL:
AH:
BX:

Return  Code
Extended  Error
Same  as AX

The  DRV_ACCESS  system  call  inserts  a special open file item  into  the  system  Lock
List  for  each  specified  drive.  While  the  item  exists  in  the  Lock  List,  the  drive  cannot
be  reset  by  another  process.  The  calling  process  passes  the  drive  vector  in  register
DX.  The  format  of  the  drive  vector  is discussed  at  the  beginning of  Section  6.2.3.

The  DRV_ACCESS  system  call  inserts  no  items  if  insufficient  free  space  exists  in
the  Lock  List  to  support  all  the  new  items  or  if the  number  of  items  to  be  inserted
puts  the  calling  process  over  the  Lock  List  open  file  maximum.  If  the  BDOS  Error
mode  is  the  in  default  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call),  the file system
displays  a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error  and  terminates  the  calling
process.  Otherwise,  DRV_ACCESS  returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL set
to  OFFH  and  register AH  set to  one  of the  following  hexadecimal  values.

OAH  - Open  File Limit  Exceeded
OBH  - No  Room  in  System  Lock  List

On  successful  calls,  DRV_ACCESS 

returns  with  register  AL  set  to  OOH.

6-46

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  ALLOCVEC

DRV  ALLOCVEC

Get  Allocation  Vector  Address
For The Calling Process's  Default  Disk

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

01BH  (27)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:
BX:
ES:

ALLOC  Address  -  Offset
Same  as  AX
ALLOC  Address  - Segment

Concurrent  CP/M-86  maintains  an  allocation  vector  in  memory  for  each  active
disk  drive.  Some  programs  use  the  information  provided  by  the  allocation  vector  to
determine  the  amount  of  free  data  space  on  a  drive.  Note,  however,  that  the  alloca-
tion  information  can  be  inaccurate  if the  drive has  been  marked  Read-Only.

The  DRV_ALLOCVEC  system  call  returns  the  address  of  the  allocation  vector  for
the  currently  selected  drive.  If a  physical error  is encountered  when  the  BDOS  Error
mode  is  in  one  of  the  return  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call),
DRV_ALLOCVEC  returns  the  value OFFFFH in  AX.

You  can  use  the  DRV_SPACE  system  call  to  directly  return  the  number  of  free
128-byte  records  on  a  drive. The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  utility, SHOW, finds a  drive's
free  space  by  using  the  DRV_SPACE  system  call.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-47

DRV  ALLRESET

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  ALLRESET

Restore  All Drives To  Reset  State

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

ODH  (13)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:

0  if  successful
OFFH  on  error
Same  as AL

The  DRV_ALLRESET  system  call  restores  the file system to  a reset  state  where all
the  disk  drives  are  set to  Read-Write  (refer  to  the  DRV_SETRO  and  DRV_ROVEC
system  calls), the  default  disk  is set  to  drive A, and  the  default  DMA  address  is  reset
to  offset  08 OH relative  to  the  current  DMA  segment address.  This  system call can  be
used,  for  example,  by  an  application  program  that  requires  disk  changes  during
operation. You  can  also  use the  DRV_RESET system  call for  this purpose.

, 

• 

i 

i • i 

>  S

This  system  call  is conditional  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  If another  process  has
a  file  open  on  any  of  the  drives  to  be  reset,  and  the  drive  is  also  Read-Only  or
removable,  the  DRV_ALLRESET  system  call  is  denied,  and  none  of  the  specified
drives  are  reset  (see Section  2.17).

Upon  return,  if the  reset  operation  is successful,  DRV_ALLRESET sets  register  AL
to  OOH. Otherwise,  it  sets  register  AL  to  OFFH.  If  the  BDOS  is  not  in  one  of  the
return  error  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call),  the file system  displays
an  error message at  the console identifying the process owning  the first open file that
caused  the  DRV  ALLRESET to  be  denied.

6-48

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

DRV  DPB

DRV  DPB

Return  Address  Of  Disk  Parameter  Block
For  Calling Process's  Default  Disk

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

01FH  (31)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
ES:

DPB Address  -  Offset
OFFFFH  - on  Physical  Error
Same  as  AX
DPB Address  - Segment

DRV_DPB  returns  the  address  of  the  XlOS-resident  Disk  Parameter  Block (DPB)
for  the  currently  selected  drive.  The  calling  process  can  use  this  address  to  extract
the  disk  parameter  values.

If  a physical  error  is encountered  when  the  BDOS Error  mode  is one  of  the  Return
Error  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call),  DRV_DPB  returns  the  value
OFFFFH.

V

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

6-49

DRV  DPB

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  Disk  Parameter  Block  (DPB) contains  the  parameters  that  define  the  actual

disk.

OOH

05H

09H

ODH

SPT

DSM

I _

AL1

OFF

BSH

BLM

EXM

DRM
1

CKS

PRM

Figure  6-4.  DPB - Disk  Parameter Block

Table  6-10.  DPB Field Definitions

Field

Definition

SPT Sectors  Per Track

The  number  of  Sectors  Per  Track  equals  the  total  number of
physical sectors  per  track.  Physical sector  size is defined  by PSH
and  PRM  described  below.

BSH Allocation  Block  Shift  Factor

BLM Allocation  Block  Mask

The  data  allocation  block  size determines  the values of the  data
allocation  Block Shift  Factor and the allocation Block Mask.  The
Block  Shift  factor  equals  the  logarithm  base  two  of  the  block
logical  size  in  128  byte  records,  or  BSH  =  LOG2(BLS). The
Block  Mask  equals  the  number  of  128-byte  records  in  an  allo-
cation  block  minus  1,  or  BLM  =  (2**BSH)-1.  Refer  to  the
Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for  valid  block  sizes  and
BSH and  BLM values.

6-50

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

DRV_DPB

Table  6-10. 

(continued)

Field 

Definition

EXM  Extent  Mask

The  data  block  allocation size and the number of disk allocation
blocks determine the value of the Extent Mask. The Extent Mask
determines  the  maximum  number  of  16k  extents  that  can  be
contained  in a directory entry. It is equal to the maximum number
of  16K extents  per  directory  entry  minus one.  Refer to the  Con-
current  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for  EXM  values.

DSM  Disk  Storage  Maximum

The  Disk  Storage  Maximum  defines  the  total  storage  capacity
of the drive. This is equal to the total number of allocation blocks
minus 1 for the drive. DSM must be less than or equal to  7FFFH.
If the disk uses 1024  byte blocks (BSH = 3, BLM = 7), DSM must
be  less than  or  equal  to  OOFFH.

DRM  Directory  Maximum

The  Directory  Maximum  defines  the  total  number  of  directory
entries for the drive. This is equal to the total number of directory
entries,  minus  1,  that  can  be  kept  on  this  drive.  The  directory
requires  32  bytes  of  disk  per  entry.  The  maximum  directory
allocation  is  16  blocks,  where  the  block  size  is  determined  by
BSH  and  BLM.

ALO  Directory  Allocation  Vector  0
AL1 Directory  Allocation  Vector  1

The  Directory  Allocation  Vectors  determine  the  reserved  direc-
tory  allocation  blocks.

DIGITAL RESEARCH ™

6-51

DRV_DPB 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Table  6-10. 

(continued)

Field 

Definition

CKS  Checksum  Vector  Size

The  Checksum  Vector  Size determines the required length of the
directory  checksum  vector  and  the  number  of  directory  entries
that the BDOS will checksum. The Checksum Vector Size is equal
entries  divided  by  4,  or
to 
CKS  =  (DRM+ l)/4.  If the  media  is fixed, CKS might  be  zero,
no storage needs to be reserved, and the BDOS does  not calculate
directory  checksums  for  the  drive.

the  number  of  directory 

The high-bit of CKS (that is, >  =  08000H) is set if the referenced
drive is considered  to be a nonremovable media drive. Note that
this  modifies  the  rules  for  resetting  the  drive.  For  more  infor-
mation,  refer  to  Section  2.15.

OFF Track  Offset

The  Track  Offset  is the  number of  reserved tracks  at  the  begin-
ning of the  disk. OFF is equal to  the track  number on  which  the
directory  starts.

PSH  Physical Record  Shift  Factor

The  Physical  Record  Shift  Factor  ranges  from  0  to  5,  corre-
sponding  to  physical  record  sizes of  128,  256,  512,  IK,  2K, or
4K  bytes.  It  is  equal  to  the  logarithm  base  two  of  the  physical
record  size divided  by  128,  or  LOG2(sector_size/128).

PRM  Physical  Record  Mask

The  Physical Record  Mask  ranges  from  0 to  31,  corresponding
to  physical  record  sizes of  128,  256,  512,  IK, 2K, or  4K bytes.
It is equal to  the  physical sector size divided by  128 minus  1, or
(sector_size/128)-l.

For  more  information  on  DPB parameters,  refer  to  the  Concur-
rent  CP/M-86  System  Guide,  Section  5.4.

6-52

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

DRV  FLUSH

DRV  FLUSH

Flush  Write-Deferred  Buffers

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

030H  (48)
Purge Flag

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

Error  Flag
Permanent  Error
Same  as  AX

The  DRV_FLUSH  system  call  forces  the  write  of  any  write-pending  records  con-
tained 
in  internal  blocking/deblocking  buffers.  If  register  DL  is  set  to  OFFH,
DRV_FLUSH  also  purges  all  active  data  buffers  after  performing  the  writes.  Pro-
grams  that  provide  write  with  read  verify  support  need  to  purge  internal  buffers  to
ensure  that  verifying  reads  actually access  the  disk  instead  of  returning data  resident
in  internal  data  buffers.  The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  PIP utility is an  example  of  such  a
program.

Upon  return,  the  system  call  sets  register  AL  to  OOH if  the  flush  operation  is
successful.  If a  physical error  is encountered,  DRV_FLUSH performs different  actions
depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  system  displays  a  message  at  the
console  identifying  the  error  and  terminates the  calling  process.  Otherwise,  it returns
to  the  calling process  with  register AL set to  OFFH and  register  AH  set to  one  of  the
following  physical error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-53

I

DRV  GETLABEL

Return  Directory  Label  Data  Byte
For  The  Specified Drive

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

065H  (101)
Drive

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

Directory  Label Data  Byte
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  DRV_GETLABEL  system  call  returns  the  directory  label  data  byte  for  the
specified  drive.  The  calling process  passes  the  drive number  in  register  DL  with  0  for
drive  A,  1  for  drive  B,  continuing  through  15  for  drive  P  in  a  full  16-drive  system.
The  format  of  the  directory  label data  byte  is shown  below:

bit  7  -  Require  passwords  for  password  protected files

6  -  Perform  access  time  and  date  stamping
5  -  Perform  update  time  and  date  stamping

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

DRV  LOGINVEC

DRV  LOGINVEC

Return  Bit Map  Of  Logged-in  Disk Drives

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
Returned  Values:
Register  AX:
BX:

018H  (24)

Login  Vector
Same  as  AX

The  DRV_LOGINVEC  system  call  returns  the  Login  Vector  in  register  AX.  The
Login  Vector  is a  16-bit  value with  the  least  significant  bit  corresponding  to  drive A,
and  the  high-order  bit  corresponding  to  the  16th  drive, drive  P. A 0  bit  indicates that
the  drive  is  not  logged-in,  while  a  1  bit  indicates  the  drive  is  logged  in.  Refer  to  the
beginning  of  Section  6.2.3  for  a  complete  description  of  the  Login  Vector.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-57

DRV  RESET

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  RESET

Reset  Specified Disk  Drives

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:

025H  (37)
Drive  Vector

Returned  Values:
AL:
BL:

Return  Code
Same  as AL

The  DRV_RESET  system  call  is used  to  programmatically restore  specified remov-
able  media  drives  to  the  reset  state  (a  reset  drive  is  not  logged  in  and  is  in  Read-
Write  status).  The  passed  parameter  in  register  DX  is a  16-bit  vector  of  drives  to  be
reset,  where  the  least  significant bit  corresponds  to  drive  A,  and  the  high-order  bit
corresponds  to  the  sixteenth  drive,  labeled  P.  Bit values of  1 indicate that  the  speci-
fied drive  is to  be reset.  Refer to  Section  2.17  for  more  information regarding the use
of  this  system  call.

This  system  call  is  conditional  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  If  another  process  has
a  file  open  on  any  of  the  drives  to  be  reset,  the  DRV_RESET  system  call  is  denied,
and  none  of  the  drives are  reset.

Upon  return,  if  the  reset  operation  is  successful,  DRV_RESET  sets  register  AL  to
OOH.  Otherwise,  it  sets  register  AH  to  OFFH.  If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  not  in
Return  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call), the  system  displays an
error  message  at  the  console,  identifying  the  process  owning  the  first  open  file  that
caused  the  DRV_RESET  request  to  be  denied.

6-58

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

DRV  ROVEC

DRV  ROVEC

Return  Bit Map  Of  Read-Only  Disks

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

01DH  (29)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:
BX:

R/O  Vector
Same  as  AX

DRV_ROVEC  returns  a  bit  vector  indicating  which  drives  have  the  temporary

Read-Only  bit  set.  The  Read-Only  bit  can  only be set by a  DRV_SETRO  call.

Note:  when  the  file  system  detects  a  change  in  the  media  on  a  drive,  it  automati-
cally  logs  in  the  drive and  sets  it to  Read-Write.

The  format  of  the  R/O  Vector  is analogous  to  that  of the  Login  Vector.  The  least
significant  bit  corresponds  to  drive A; the  most  significant  bit  corresponds  to  drive P.
For  a  complete  description  of  the  R/O  Vector,  refer  to  the  beginning of  this  section.

3 

.'•

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-59

DRV  SET

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  SET

Set Calling Process's  Default  Disk

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

OEH (14)
Selected  disk

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

Error  Flag
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  DRV_SET  system  call  designates  the  specified  disk  drive  as  the  default  disk
for  subsequent  BDOS file operations.  Set the  DL register  to  0 for  drive A,  1 for drive
B,  continuing  through  15  for  drive  P.  DRV_SET  also  logs  in  the  designated  drive if
it  is  currently  in  the  reset  state.  Logging  in  a  drive  activates  the  drive's  directory  for
file operations.

FCBs  that  specify  drive  code  zero  (DR  =  OOH) automatically  reference  the  cur-
rently  selected  default  drive.  FCBs  with  drive  code  values between  1  and  16,  how-
ever,  ignore  the  selected  default drive  and  directly reference drives A through  P.

Upon  return,  register  AL equal  to  OOH indicates  the  select  operation  was  success-
ful.  If  a  physical  error  is encountered,  DRV_SET  performs  different  actions  depend-
ing on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the F_ERRMODE  system call).

If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default mode,  the  system  displays a  message  at
the  console,  identifying  the  error  and  terminates  the  calling  process.  Otherwise,
DRV_SET  returns  to  the  calling  process  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register
AH set to  one  of the  following  physical  error codes:

01H - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive  select  error

6-60

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

DRV  SETLABEL

DRV  SETLABEL

Create  Or  Update  A Directory  Label

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

064H  (100)
FCB  Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  DRV_SETLABEL  system  call  creates  a  directory  label  or  updates  the  existing
directory  label  for  the  specified  drive.  The  calling process  passes  the  address  of  an
FCB containing  the  name,  type,  and  extent fields to  be assigned to  the directory  label.
The  name  and  type  fields  of  the  referenced  FCB are  not  used  to  locate  the  directory
label  in  the  directory;  they  are  simply  copied  into  the  updated  or  created  directory
label.  Byte  12  of  the  FCB contains  the  user's  specification  of the  directory  label  data
byte.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-61

DRV_SETLABEL 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  definition  of  the  directory  label  data  byte is

bit  7  -  Require  passwords  for  password  protected files

6  -  Perform  access  time  and  date  stamping
5  -  Perform update  time  and  date stamping
4  -  Perform  create  time  and  date  stamping
0  -  Assign a  new  password  to  the  directory  label

(Bit  0  is the  least  significant  bit)

If  the  current  directory  label  is  password  protected,  the  correct  password  must  be
placed  in  the  first  8  bytes of  the  current  DMA  or  have been  previously established as
the  default  password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD  system  call).  If  bit  0  of  the  directory
label  data  byte  is  set  to  1,  it  indicates  that  a  new  password  for  the  directory  label
has  been  placed  in  the  second  eight  bytes of  the  current DMA. 

^"^

The  DRV_SETLABEL  system  call  also  requires  that  the  referenced  directory  con-
tains  SFCBs  in  order  to  activate  date  and  time  stamping  on  the  drive. If an  attempt
is made  to  activate  date  and  time  stamping  when  no  SFCBs exist,  the  DRV_SETLA-
BEL  system  call  returns  an  error  code  and  performs  no  action.  The  Concurrent
CP/M-86  INITDIR  utility  initializes a  directory  for  date  and  time  stamping  by plac-
ing  an  SFCB in  every  fourth  entry  of  the  directory.

Upon  return,  the  DRV_SETLABEL  system  call  returns  a  directory  code  in  register
AL  with  the  value  OOH if  the  directory  label  create  or  update  was  successful,  or
OFFH  if  no  space  existed  in  the  referenced  directory  to  create  a  directory  label.  It
also  returns  OFFH if date  and  time  stamping  was  requested  and  the  referenced direc-
tory  did  not  contain  SFCBs.  Register  AH  is set to  OOH  in all of  these  cases.

o

6-62

m  DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

DRV_SETLABEL

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is  encountered,  the  DRV_SETLABEL system  call
performs  different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode 
the
F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the file
system  displays  a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error  and  terminates  the
calling  process.  Otherwise,  the  DRV_SETLABEL system  call  returns  to  the  calling
process  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register  AH  set  to  one  of  the  following
physical  or  extended  error  codes:

(refer 

to 

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error
07H  - Password  Error

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-63

DRV  SETRO

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  SETRO

Set Default Disk  To Read-Only

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

01CH  (28)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

Return  Code
Same  as AL

The  DRV_SETRO  system  call  provides  temporary  write  protection  for  the  cur-
rently  selected  disk  by  marking  the  drive  as  Read-Only. No  process  can  write  to  a
disk  that  is  in  the  Read-Only  state.  You  must  perform  a  successful  DRV_RESET
operation  to  restore  a  Read-Only  drive  to  the  Read-Write  state 
(refer  to  the
DRV_ALLRESET  and  DRV_RESET  system  calls).

The  DRV_SETRO  system  call  is  conditional  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  If  another
process  has  an  open  file  on  the  drive,  the  operation  is  denied,  and  the  system  call
returns  the  value  OFFH  to  the  calling  process.  Otherwise,  it  returns  a  OOH. If  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  not  in  Return  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system
call),  the file system  displays  an  error  message  at  the  console,  identifying  the  process
owning  the first  open  file  that  caused  the  DRV_SETRO  request  to  be denied.

Note  that  a  drive  in  the  Read-Only  state  cannot  be  reset  by  a  process  if  another

process has  an  open file on  the drive.

6-64

go)  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

DRV  SPACE

DRV  SPACE

Return  Free  Disk  Space  On  Specified  Drive

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

02EH (46)
Drive

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

J  1

' 

Error  Flag 
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX
First  3  bytes of  DMA  Buffer  filled  in

The  DRV_SPACE  system  call  determines  the  number  of  free  sectors  (128-byte
records)  on  the  specified  drive. The  calling process  passes  the  drive number  in  register
DL,  with  0  for  drive  A,  1  for  B,  continuing  through  15  for  drive  P.  DRV_SPACE
returns  a  binary  number  in the first 3  bytes  of the  current  DMA  buffer.  This  number
is returned  in  the  format  shown  in  Figure  6-5.

DIGITAL RESEARCH ™

6-65

DRV  SPACE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

IFSO 

FS1

FS2

FSO  -  LOW 
BYTE
FS1  =  MIDDLE  BYTE
BYTE
FS2  =  HIGH 

Figure  6-5.  Disk  Free Space Field Format

Note  that  the  returned  free  space  value  might  be  inaccurate  if  the  drive  has  been
marked  Read-Only.

Upon  return,  DRV_SPACE  sets  register  AL  to  OOH, indicating the  operation  was
successful.  However,  if  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  one  of  the  return  modes  (refer  to
the  F_ERRMODE  system  call),  and  a  physical  error  occurs,  it  sets  register  AL  to
OFFH, and  register  AH  to  one  of  the  following values:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error

6.2.4  File-Access System Calls

Most file-access system  calls reference a  File Control  Block  (FCB). This  data structure
is  illustrated  in  Table  2-1.  Refer  to  Section  2.4  for  a  comprehensive  explanation  of
the  FCB data  structure,  its initialization,  and  usage.

6-66

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  ATTRIB

F  ATTRIB

Set The  Attributes Of  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

01EH  (30)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Directory  Code
Same  as  AL

By  calling  the  F_ATTRIB  system  call,  a  process  can  modify  a  file's  attributes  and
set  its  last  record  byte  count.  Other  BDOS  system  calls  can  interrogate  these  file
parameters,  but  only  F_ATTRIB  can  change them.  The file attributes  that  can  be set
or  reset  by  F_ATTRIB  are  Fl'  through  F4',  Read-Only  (Tl'),  System  (T2'),  and
Archive  (T3').  The  specified  FCB contains  a filename with  the  appropriate  attributes
set  or  reset.  The  calling process  must  ensure  that  it  does  not  specify  an  ambiguous
filename.  Also,  if  the  specified file is password  protected,  the  correct  password  must
be  placed  in  the  first  eight  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  buffer  or  have  been previously
established  as  the  default password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD  system call). 

;

Interface  attribute  F5'  specifies  whether  an  extended  file  lock  is to  be  maintained
after  the  F_ATTRIB  call.  Interface  attribute  F6'  specifies  if  the  specified  file's  byte
count  is to  be set.  The  interface attribute  definitions are  listed  below:

-"  r,{

F5' =  0 - Do  not  maintain  an  extended file lock  (default)
F5'=  1 - Maintain  an extended file lock
F6' =  0 - Do not  set byte count  (default)
F6' =  1 - Set byte  count

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-67

F_ATTRIB 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

If  F5'  is  set  and  the  referenced  FCB  specifies  a  file  with  an  extended  file  lock,  the
calling  process  maintains  the  lock  on  the  file.  Otherwise,  the  file  becomes  available
to  other  processes  on  the  system.  Section  2.11  describes  extended  file  locking  in
detail.

If  interface  attribute  F6'  is  set,  the  calling  process  must  set  the  CR  field  of  the
referenced  FCB  to  the  new  byte  count  value. A process  can  access  a  file's  byte count
value  with  the  BDOS  F_OPEN,  F_SFIRST,  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls.  File  byte
counts  are  described  in  Section  2.15.

F_ATTRIB  searches  the  FCB  specified  directory  for  an  entry  belonging  to  the
current  user  number  that  matches  the  FCB specified  name and  type fields. The system
call  then  updates  the  directory  to  contain  the  selected  indicators,  and  if interface
attribute  F6'  is  set,  the  specified  byte  count  value.  Note  that  the  last  record  byte
count  is maintained  in  the  byte  13  of  a  file's  directory  FCBs.

File  attributes Tl', T2',  and  T3'  are  defined  by  Concurrent  CP/M-86  as described
in  Section 2.4.2. Attributes FT thru F4' of command  files  are defined as compatibility
attributes,  as  described  in  Section  2.12.  However,  for  all  other  files,  attributes  Fl'
through  F4'  are  available  for  definition  by  the  user.  Attributes F5'  through  F8'  are
reserved  as interface attributes and cannot be used  as file  attributes.  Interface attributes
are  described  in  Section  2.4.3.

An  F_ATTRIB  system  call  is  not  performed  if  the  referenced  FCB  specifies  a  file
currently  open  for  another  process.  It  is performed,  however,  if  the  referenced file is
open  by  the  calling  process  in  Locked  mode. However, the file's lock  entry  is  purged
when  this  is  done  and  the  file  system  prevents  continued  read  and  write  operations
on  the  file.  F_ATTRIB  does  not  set  the  attributes  of  a file  currently  open  in  Read-
Only  or  Unlocked  mode  for  any process.

6-68

M  DIGITAL RESEARCH

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_ATTRIB

Making  an  F_ATTRIB  system  call  for  an  open file can  adversely affect  the perfor-
mance  of  the  calling process.  For  this  reason,  you  should  close  an  open  file  before
you  call  the  F_ATTRIB  system  call.

Upon  return,  F_ATTRIB  returns  a  directory  code  in  register  AL  with  the  value
OOH  if  the  system  call  is  successful,  or  OFFH  if  the  file  specified  by  the  referenced
FCB  is not  found.  Register  AH  is set  to  OOH in  both  cases.

If  a  physical or  extended  error  is encountered,  the  F_ATTRIB system call performs
different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE
system  call).  If the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  file  system displays
a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error  and  terminates the  process.  Otherwise,
it  returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL set to  OFFH  and  register AH  set  to
one  of  the  following physical or  extended  error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive  select  error
05H  - File open  by  another  process 
07H  - Password  Error
09H  -  Illegal  ? in  FCB

•  .

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-69

F  CLOSE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  CLOSE

Close  A Disk  File

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

010H  (16)
FCB Address  - Offset
FCB Address  -  Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_CLOSE  system  call  performs  the  inverse operation  of  the  F_OPEN  system
call.  The  referenced  FCB  must  have  been  previously activated  by  a  successful  F_OPEN
or  F_MAKE  system  call.  Interface attributes  F5'  and  F6'  specify  how  the file is to  be
closed, as shown  below:

F5'  =  0, F6'  =  0 - Default Close
F5'  =  0, F6'  =  1 - Extend  File  Lock
F5'  =  1, F6'  =  0 - Partial  Close
F5'  =  1, F6'  =  1 - Partial  Close

The  F_CLOSE  system  call  performs  the  following  steps  regardless  of  the interface
attribute  specification.  First  of  all,  it  verifies  that  the  referenced  FCB  has  a  valid
checksum.  If  the  checksum  is  invalid,  F_CLOSE  performs  no  action  and  returns  an
error  code.

6-70

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F  CLOSE

If  the  checksum  is valid and  the  referenced FCB contains  new  information because
of  write  operations  to  the  FCB, F_CLOSE  permanently records  the  new information
in  the  directory.  If the  FCB does  not  contain  new  information, the  directory  update
step  is  bypassed.  However,  F_CLOSE  always  attempts  to  locate  the  FCB's  corre-
sponding  entry  in  the  directory  and  returns  an  error  code  if  the  directory  entry
cannot  be found.

If  the  F_CLOSE  system  call  successfully  performs  the  above  steps,  it  performs
different  actions,  depending  on  how  the  interface  attributes  are  set.  In  default  close
operations,  F_CLOSE  decrements  the  file's  open  count,  which  is  maintained  in  the
file's  system  Lock  List  entry.  If  the  open  count  decrements  to  zero,  it  indicates  that
the  number  of  default  close  operations  for  the  file  matches  the  number  of  open
operations.

If  the  open  count  decrements  to  zero,  F_CLOSE  permanently  closes  the  file  by
performing  the  following steps.  First of  all, it  removes the file's item  from  the system
Lock  List.  If  the  FCB  is  opened  in  Unlocked  mode,  it  also  purges  all  record  locks
belonging  to  the  file  from  the  system  Lock  List.  In  addition,  F_CLOSE invalidates
the  FCB's  checksum  to  ensure  the  referenced  FCB  is  not  subsequently  used  with
BDOS  system  calls that  require an  open  FCB (for example, F_WRITE).

If  the  open  count  does  not  decrement  to  zero,  F_CLOSE  simply  returns  to  the

calling process  and  the file remains open.

For  partial  close  operations,  F_CLOSE  does  not  decrement  the  file's  open  count
and  returns  to  the  calling process.  The file always remains open  following a  partial
close  request.

13 DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-71

F_CLOSE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Closing  a  file  with  an  extended  file  lock  modifies  the  way  F_CLOSE  performs  a
permanent  close.  F_CLOSE  only  honors  an  extended  lock  request  on  a  permanent
close of a file opened  in Locked mode. If these conditions  are satisfied, F_CLOSE invali-
dates the FCB's checksum but maintains the lock item. Thus, although the  file is perma-
nently closed, other processes  cannot  access the file. Section 2.11 describes extended  file
locking in detail.

Upon  return,  the  F_CLOSE  system call returns a directory  code  in register AL with
the  value  OOH if  the  close  operation  is  successful,  or  OFFH if  the  file  is  not  found.
Register  AH  is set to  0 in  both  of these  cases.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is encountered,  the  F_CLOSE  system  call  performs
different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE
system  call). If the  BDOS  Error  mode  is in  the  default  mode,  the file system displays
a  message  identifying  the  error  at  the  console  and  terminates  the  calling  process.
Otherwise  the  F_CLOSE  system  call  returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL
set  to  OFFH and  register  AH  set  to  one  of  the  following physical  or  extended  error
codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive  select  error
06H  - Close  Checksum  Error

6-72

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  DELETE

F  DELETE

Delete  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:

013H  (19)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_DELETE  system  call  removes  files  and/or  XFCBs  that  match  the  FCB
addressed  in  register  DX.  The  filename  and filetype fields can  contain  wildcard file
specifications  (question  marks  in  bytes  1  through  11),  but  byte  0  cannot  be  a  wild-
card  as it can  be in the  F_SFIRST  and  F_SNEXT  system  calls.  Interface attribute  F5'
specifies  the  type  of  delete  operation  to  be performed,  as shown  below:

F5'  =  0 - Standard  Delete  (Default  mode)
F5'  =  1 - Delete  only  XFCB's  and  maintain  an extended file lock.

If  any  of  the  files  specified  by  the  referenced FCB are  password  protected,  the  correct
password  must  be  placed  in  the  first  eight  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  buffer  or  it
must  have  been  previously  established  as  the  default  password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD
system  call).

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-73

F_DELETE 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

For  standard  delete  operations,  the  F_DELETE  system  call  removes  all  directory
entries  belonging  to files that  match  the  referenced FCB.  All disk  directory  and  data
space  owned  by  the  deleted  files  is  returned  to  free  space  and  becomes  available for
allocation  to  other  files.  Directory  XFCBs  that  were  owned  by  the  deleted  files  are
also  removed  from  the  directory.  If  interface  attribute  F5'  of  the  FCB  is  set  to  1,
F_DELETE  deletes  only  the  directory  XFCBs matching  the  referenced FCB.

Note: 
if  any  of  the  files  matching  the  input  FCB  specification  fail  the  password
check,  are  Read-Only,  or  are  currently  open  by  another  process,  then  F_DELETE
deletes  no files or  XFCBs.  This  applies  to  both  types  of delete  operations.

Interface  attribute  F5'  also  specifies  whether  an  extended  file  lock  is  to  be  main-
tained  after  the  F_DELETE  call.  If F5'  is  set  and  the  referenced  FCB  specifies  a file
with  an  extended  lock,  the  calling process  maintains the  lock on  the file. Section 2.11
describes  extended  file  locking  in  detail.

A  process  can  delete  a file that  it  currently  has  open  if the file is opened  in  Locked
mode.  However,  the  BDOS  returns  a  checksum  error  if  the  process  makes  a  subse-
quent  reference to  the file with  a BDOS  system call requiring an  open  FCB. A process
cannot  delete files open  in  Read-Only  or  Unlocked  mode.

Deleting  an  open  file  can  adversely  affect  the  performance  of  the  calling  process.

For  this  reason,  you  should  close  an  open file before you  delete  it.

Upon  return,  the  F_DELETE  system  call  returns  a  directory  code  in  register  AL
with  the  value  OOH  if  the  delete  is  successful,  or  OFFH  if  no  file  matching  the
referenced  FCB  is  found.  Register  AH  is set  to  0  in  both  of  these  cases.  If a physical
or  extended  error  is  encountered,  F_DELETE  performs  different  actions,  depending
on the BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to the F_ERRMODE  system call). 

\

6-74

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_DELETE

If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  the  default  mode,  the  system displays a  message iden-
tifying  the  error  at  the  console  and  terminates  the  calling  process.  Otherwise,  it
returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register  AH  set  to
one  of  the  following physical or  extended  error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
03H  -  Read/Only  File
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error
05H  -  File  opened  by  another  process  or  open
in  Read-Only  or  Unlocked  mode

07H  - Password  Error

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-75

F  DMAGET

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

F  DMAGET

Return  Address  Of  Direct
Memory  Access  Buffer

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

034H (52)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:
BX:
ES:

DMA  Offset
Same  as  AX
DMA  Segment

F_DMAGET  returns  the  current  DMA  Base Segment address  in  ES, with  the cur-

rent  DMA  Offset  in  DX.

6-76

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  DMAOFF

F  DMAOFF

Set The  Direct  Memory  Access  Offset

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL: 

01AH  (26)

DX:  DMA  Address  -  Offset

DMA  is  an  acronym  for  Direct  Memory  Access,  which  is  often  used  with  disk
controllers  that  directly access  the  memory  of  the  computer  to  transfer data  to  and
from  the  disk  subsystem.  Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  current  DMA  is usually
defined  as  the  buffer  in  memory  where  a  record  resides  before  a  disk  write  and  after
a  disk  read  operation.  If  the  BDOS  Multisector  Count  is  equal  to  one  (refer  to  the
F_MULTISEC  system  call), the  size of  the  buffer  is  128  bytes.  However,  if the  BDOS
Multisector  Count  is  greater  than  one,  the  size  of  the  buffer  must  equal  N  *  128,
where  N  equals  the  Multisector  Count.

Some  BDOS  system  calls  also  use  the  current  DMA  to  pass  parameters  and  to
return  values.  For  example,  BDOS  system  calls that  check  and  assign  file  passwords
require  that  the  password  be  placed  in  the  current DMA  buffer.  As another example,
DRV_SPACE  returns  its  results  in  the  first  3  bytes  of  the  current  DMA.  When  the
current  DMA  is  used  in  this  context,  the  size  of  the  buffer  in  memory  is  determined
by  the  specific requirements  of  the  system  call.

When  the  P_CLI  system  call  initiates  a  transient  program,  it  sets  the  DMA  offset
to  080H  and  the  DMA  Segment  or  Base  to  its  initial  Data  Segment. DRV_ALLRE-
SET also  sets  the  DMA  offset  to  080H. The  F_DMAOFF system call can  change  this
default  value to  another  memory  address.  The  DMA  address  remains  at  its  current
value  until  it  is changed  by  an  F_DMASEG,  F_DMAOFF,  or  DRV_ALLRESET call.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-77

F  DMASEG

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  DMASEG

Set Direct  Memory Access
Segment  Address

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  033H (51)

DX:  DMA  Segment Address

F_DMASEG  sets  the  segment value of  the  current DMA  buffer  address.  The  word
parameter  in  DX  is  a  paragraph  address  and  is  used  with  the  DMA  offset  value  to
specify  the  20-bit  address  of  the  DMA  buffer.  Refer  to  the  F_DMAOFF  system  call
for  additional  information.

Note that  upon  initial program  loading,  the default DMA base is set to  the  address
of  the  user's  data  segment  (the  initial  value  of  DS)  and  the  DMA  offset  is  set  to
0080H, which  provides  access  to  the  default  buffer  in the  Base Page.

6-78

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  ERRMODE

F  ERRMODE

Set BDOS  Error  Mode For  Error  Returns

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  02DH (45)

DL:  BDOS Error  mode

The  BDOS  Error  mode  is a  system  parameter  maintained for  each  running process
that  determines  how  the  file  system  handles  physical and  extended  errors.  Physical
and  extended  errors  are  described  in  Section  2.18.  The  BDOS  Error  mode  has  three
states:  the  default mode,  Return  and  Error  mode,  and  Return  and  Display mode.

If  a physical or  extended  error  occurs  when  the  BDOS Error  mode  is in the  default
mode,  the  BDOS  displays a  system  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error  and
terminates  the  calling  process.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  occurs  when  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  Return
Error  mode,  the  BDOS  sets  register  AL to  OFFH, places an  error  code  identifying  the
physical  or  extended  error  in  register  AH,  and  returns to  the  calling process.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  occurs  when  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  Return
and  Display  mode,  the  BDOS  displays  the  system  message  before  returning  to  the
calling process,  and  sets  registers  AH  and  AL as in the  Return Error  mode.

The  F_ERRMODE  system  call  sets  the  BDOS  Error  mode  for  the  calling  process
to  the  mode  specified  in  register  DL.  If register  DL  is set to  OFFH, the  mode  is set  to
Return  Error  mode.  If  register  DL  is  set  to  OFEH, the  mode  is  set  to  Return  and
Display  mode.  If register  DL  is set  to  any  other  value, the  mode  is set  to  the  default
mode.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-79

F  LOCK

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  LOCK

Lock  Records  In  A  Disk  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

02AH  (42)
FCB  Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_LOCK  system  call  allows  a  process  to  establish  temporary  ownership  to
particular  records  within  a  file.  This  system  call  is  only  supported  for  files  open  in
Unlocked  mode.  If  it  is  called  for  a  file  open  in  Locked  or  Read-Only  mode,  no
locking  action  is performed  and  a  successful  result is returned.  This provides  compat-
ibility  between  Concurrent  CP/M-86  and  CP/M-86.

The  calling process  passes  the  address  of  an  FCB in  which  the  random  record field
is  filled  with  the  Random  Record  Number  of  the  first  record  to  be  locked.  The
number  of  records  to  be  locked  is determined  by  the  BDOS  Multisector  Count  (refer
to  the  F_MULTISEC  system  call.)  The  current  DMA  must  also  contain  the  2-byte
File  ID  returned  by  F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE  when  the  referenced  FCB  was  opened.
Note  that  the  File  ID  is  only  returned  by  the  F_OPEN  and  F_MAKE  system  call
when  the  Open  mode  is  Unlocked.

6-80

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_LOCK

Interface  attribute F5'  specifies  the  type  of  lock  to  perform.  Interface  attribute F6'
specifies  whether  records  have to  exist  in  order  to  be  locked.  The  F_LOCK  interface
attribute  definitions  are  listed below:

F5'=  0  -  Exclusive  lock  (default)
F5'=  1 - Shared lock
F6'=  0  -  Lock  existing  records  only  (default) 
F6' =  1 - Lock  logical records

- 

j  ,  r f n,  M

These  options  are  described in  detail  in  Section  2.14.

F_LOCK  verifies  that  a  locking  conflict  with  another  process  does  not  exist  for
each  of  the  records  to  be  locked.  In  addition, if F_LOCK  is called with  attribute F6'
reset,  it  also  verifies  that  each  record  number to  be  locked  exists  within the  specified
file. Both  tests  are  made  before any  records  are  locked.

Most  F_LOCK  requests  require  a  new  entry  in  the  BDOS  system  Lock  List. If
there  is  insufficient  space  in  the  system Lock  List  to  satisfy  the  lock  request, or  if  the
process  record  lock  limit  is  exceeded,  then  F_LOCK  does  not  lock  any  records  and
returns  an  error  code  to  the  calling process.

Upon  return,  the  F_LOCK  system call  sets  register AL to  OOH if the  lock  operation

is  successful.  Otherwise,  register AL contains  one  of  the  following  error  codes:

-  Reading unwritten  data 
01H 
03H  - Cannot  close  current extent
04H  - Seek to  unwritten extent
06H  - Random  Record  Number  out  of  range
08H  - Record  locked  by  another  process
OAH  - FCB  Checksum  Error
OBH  -  Unlocked file verification  error
OCH  -  Process  record  lock  limit  exceeded
ODH  -  Invalid File ID
OEH  -  No  Room  in  System Lock  List
OFFH  - Physical error;  refer  to  register  AH

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

..  M 

,

6-81

F_LOCK 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  system  call  returns  error  code  01H  when  it  accesses  a  data  block  that  has  not

been  previously  written.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  03H  when  it  cannot  close  the  current  extent

prior  to  moving  to  a new extent.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  04H  when  it  accesses  an  extent  that  has  not

been  created.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  06H  when  byte  35  (R2) of  the  referenced FCB

is greater  than  3.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  08H  if the  specified  record  is locked  by  another

process with  an  incompatible  lock  type.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OBH if  the  BDOS  cannot  locate  the  referenced
that  the  FCB  contains  current

FCB's  directory  entry  when  attempting  to  verify 
information.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OCH  if  performing  the  lock  request  would
require  that  the  process  consume  more  than  the maximum  allowed  number of system
Lock  List  entries.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  ODH when  an  invalid  File  ID  is  placed  at  the

beginning  of  the  current  DMA.

6-82

- 

(!H  DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_LOCK

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OEH when  the  system  Lock  List  is  full  and

performing  the  lock  request  would  require at  least one new entry.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OFFH  if a physical error  is encountered,  and  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  either  Return  Error  mode  or  Return  and  Display  Error  mode
(refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,
the  system  displays  a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  physical error  and  ter-
minates  the  calling  process.  When  the  system  call  returns  a  physical  error  to  the
calling process,  it  is identified  by  register AH  as  shown  below:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-83

F  MAKE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  MAKE

Create  A  Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

016H  (22)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_MAKE  system  call creates  a  new  directory entry for  a file under the  current
user  number.  It  also  creates  an  XFCB  for  the  file  if the  referenced drive has  a  direc-
tory  label  that  enables  password  protection  on  the  drive,  and  the  calling  process
assigns  a password  to  the file.

The  calling  process passes the  address  of the FCB with  byte 0 of the FCB specifying
the  drive,  bytes  1 through  11 specifying the filename and filetype, and  byte  12 set  to
the  extent  number.  Byte  12,  the  EX  field,  is  usually  set to  OOH. Byte 32  of  the  FCB,
the  CR  field,  must  be  initialized  to  OOH, before  or  after  the  F_MAKE  call,  if  the
intent  is to  write  sequentially  from  the  beginning  of the file.

6-84

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_MAKE

Interface  attribute  F5' specifies  the  mode  in which the file is to  be opened. Interface
attribute  F6'  specifies  whether  a  password  is  to  be  assigned  to  the  created  file.  The
interface  attributes  are  summarized  below:

F5'  =  0  - Open  in Locked  mode  (default)
F5'  =  1 - Open  in Unlocked  mode
F6'  =  0  - Do  not  assign password  (default)
F6'  =  1 - Assign password  to  created file

When  attribute  F6' is set to  1, the  calling process  must place the password  in the first
8  bytes of  the  current DMA  buffer  and  set byte 9 of the  DMA  buffer  to  the  password
mode.  Note  that  F_MAKE  only  interrogates  attribute  F6'  if  the  referenced drive's
directory  label has  enabled password  support.  The  XFCB Password  mode  is summa-
rized  below:

.

..

XFCB  Password  Mode 

Bit  7  - Read  mode
Bit  6 - Write  mode
Bit  5  - Delete  mode

i

>

The  F_MAKE  system  call  returns with  an  error  code  if the  referenced  FCB names
a  file  that  currently exists  in  the  directory under  the  current user number. If there is
any  possibility of  duplication,  an  F_DELETE  call should precede  the  F_MAKE call.

If  the  make  file  operation  is  successful,  it  activates the  referenced  FCB  for  record
operations  (opens  the  FCB) and  initializes both the directory  entry and  the referenced
FCB to  an  empty file. It  also  computes  a  checksum and  assigns it  to  the  FCB. BDOS
system  calls that  require  an  open  FCB  (for example,  F_WRITE) verify  that  the  FCB
checksum  is valid before  performing their operation.  If the file is opened  in Unlocked
mode,  F_MAKE  also  sets  bytes RO and  Rl  in the  FCB to  a  two-byte  value  called the
File  ID.  The  File ID  is  a  required parameter  for  the  BDOS Lock  Record  and  Unlock
Record  system  calls.  Note  that  the  F_MAKE system call  initializes  all file attributes
to 0.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-85

F_MAKE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  BDOS  file  system  also  creates  an  open  file  item  in  the  system  Lock  List  to
record  a  successful F_MAKE  operation. While  this  item  exists,  no  other  process  can
delete,  rename,  truncate,  or  set the file attributes of this file.

A  creation  and/or  update  stamp  is made  for  the  created file if the  referenced  drive
contains  a  directory  label  that  enables creation  and/or  update time and  date stamping
and  the  FCB extent  number  is equal  to  0.

F_MAKE  also  creates  an  XFCB for  the  created file if the  referenced  drive contains
a  directory  label  that  enables password  protection,  interface  attribute F6'  of  the FCB
is  1,  and  the  FCB  is  an  extent  zero  FCB.  In  addition,  F_MAKE  also  assigns  the
password  and  password  mode  placed  in  the  first  nine  bytes  of  the  DMA  to  the
XFCB.

Upon  return,  the  F_MAKE system call returns a  directory code  in register AL with
the  value  OOH if  the  make  operation  is  successful,  or  OFFH  if  no  directory  space  is
available.  Register  AH  is set  to  OOH in  both  cases.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is encountered,  the  F_MAKE system call performs
different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE
system  call).  If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  system displays a
message  at  the  console  identifying  the error  and terminates the calling process.  Other-
wise,  it  returns  to  the  calling  process  with  register  AL set  to  OFFH and  register  AH
set  to  one  of  the  following physical or  extended  error  codes: 

•

01H  -  Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  -  Read/Only Disk
04H  -  Invalid  Drive  : drive  select error
0 8H  -  File Already Exists 
09H 
OAH  -  Open  File Limit  Exceeded
OBH  -  No  Room  in  System Lock  List

-  Illegal ? in  FCB

< 

.

.

,

.

,,

6-86

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  MULTISEC

F  MULTISEC

Set  BDOS  Multisector Count

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

02CH (44)
Number  of  Sectors

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

Return  Code
Same  as  AL

The  F_MULTISEC  system  call  provides  logical  record  blocking under  Concurrent
CP/M-86.  It  enables  a  process  to  read  and  write  from  1 to  128  physical records  of
128  bytes  at  a  time  during  subsequent  BDOS  read  and  write  system  calls.  It  also
specifies  the  number  of  128-byte  records  to  be  locked  or  unlocked  by  the  F_LOCK
and  FJJNLOCK  system calls.

F_MULTISEC  sets  the  Multisector  Count  value  for the  calling process  to  the value
passed  in  register  DL.  Once  set,  the  specified  Multisector  Count  remains  in  effect
until  the  calling  process  makes  another  F_MULTISEC  system  call  and  changes  the
value.  Note  that  the  P_CLI  system  call  sets  the  Multisector  Count  to  one  when  it
initiates  a  transient  program.

The  Multisector  Count  affects  BDOS  error  reporting  for  the  BDOS  read  and  write
system  calls.  With  the  exception  of  physical  errors,  if  an  error  occurs  during  these
system  calls  when  the  Multisector  is  greater  than  one,  they  return  the  number  of
records  successfully  processed  in  register  AH. 

-  .

Upon  return,  the  system  call  sets  register  AL  to  OOH if the  specified value  is in  the

range  of  1 to  128.  Otherwise,  it  sets  register  AL to OFFH.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-87

F  OPEN

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  OPEN

Open  A  Disk  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

OFH  (15)
FCB  Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  -  Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_OPEN  system  call  activates  the  FCB for  a file that  exists  in  the  disk  direc-
tory  under  the  currently  active  user  number  or  user  zero.  The  calling process  passes
the  address  of  the  FCB,  with  byte  0  of  the  FCB specifying  the  drive,  bytes  1  through
11  specifying  the  filename  and  filetype,  and  byte  12  specifying  the  extent.  Byte  12 is
usually  set to  zero.

Interface  attributes  F5'  and  F6'  of  the  FCB specify  the  mode  in which  the file is  to

be opened,  as shown  below:

F5'  =  0, 
F5'  =  1, 
F5'  =  0  or  1, F6'  =  1 -  Open  in Read-Only  mode

F6'  =  0  -  Open  in  Locked  mode  (default  mode)
F6'  =  0 -  Open  in  Unlocked  mode

If  the  file  is password  protected  in  Read  mode,  the  correct  password  must  be  placed
in  the  first  eight  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  or  have been  previously established as  the
default  password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD  system  call).  If the  current  record  field  of
the  FCB,  CR,  is  set  to  OFFH, the  F_OPEN  system  call  returns  the  byte  count  of  the
last  record  of  the  file  in  the  CR  field.  The  last  record  byte  count  for  a file can  be  set
using  the  F_SETATTRIB system call.

6-88

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_OPEN

the  calling  process  must  set  the  CR  field  of  the  FCB to  OOH if  the  file  is  to

Note: 
be  accessed  sequentially  from  the first record.

-,'f-L 

••

The  F_OPEN  system  call  performs  the  following  steps  for  files  opened  in  locked
or  Read-Only  mode.  If the  current  user  is nonzero  and  the file to  be opened  does  not
exist  under  the  current  user  number,  the  Open  File  system  call  searches  user  0  for
the file. If the file exists  under  user  0  and  has  the  system  attribute  (T2')  set,  the file is
opened  under  user  0.  The  Open  mode  is automatically set to  Read-Only  when  this is
done.

The  F_OPEN  system  call  also  performs  the  following  action  for  files  opened  in
locked  mode  when  the  current  user  number  is  0.  If  the  file  exists  in  the  directory
under  user  0,  and  has  both  the  system attribute  (T2')  set and  the  Read-Only  attribute
(Tl')  set,  the  Open  mode  is  automatically set  to  Read-Only.  Note  that  Read-Only
mode  implies  the  file  can  be  concurrently  accessed  by  other  processes  if  they  also
open  the file in  Read-Only  mode.

If  the  open  operation  is  successful, F_OPEN  activates  the  user's  FCB  for  record
operations  as  follows:  F_OPEN  copies  the  relevant  directory  information  from  the
matching  directory  FCB  into  bytes  DO through  D15  of  the  FCB.  It  also  computes  a
checksum  and  assigns it  to  the  FCB. All BDOS  system  calls  that  require an  open  FCB
(for  example,  F_READ)  verify  that  the  FCB  checksum  is  valid  before  performing
their  operation.

If  the  file  is opened  in  Unlocked  mode,  the  F_OPEN  system  call  sets  bytes  RO  and
Rl  of  the  FCB  to  a  two-byte  value  called  the  File  ID.  The  File  ID  is  a  required
parameter  for  the  F_LOCK  and  F_UNLOCK  system  calls.  If  the  Open  mode  is
forced  to  Read-Only,  F_OPEN  sets  interface  attribute F8'  to  1 in  the  user's  FCB.  In
addition,  the  system  call  sets  attribute  F7'  to  1  if  the  referenced  file  is  password
protected  in  Write  mode  and  the  correct  password  was  not  passed  in  the  DMA  or
did  not  match  the  default  password.  The  BDOS  does  not  support  write  operations
for  an  activated  FCB  if interface  attribute  F7'  or  F8'  is set  to  1.

D DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-89

F_OPEN 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  BDOS  file  system  also  creates  an  open  file  item  in  the  system  Lock  List  to
record  a  successful open  file  operation.  While  this  item  exists,  no  other  process  can
delete,  rename,  or  modify  the  file's  attributes.  In  addition,  this  item  prevents  other
processes  from  opening  the  file  if  the  file  is opened  in  Locked  mode.  It  also  requires
that  other  processes  match  the  file's  Open  mode  if the file is opened  in  Unlocked  or
Read-Only  mode.  This  item  remains  in  the  system  Lock  List  until the  file  is  perma-
nently  closed  or  until  the process  that  opened  the file terminates.

When  the  open  operation  is  successful,  the  F_OPEN  system  call  also  makes  an
access  time  and  date  stamp  for  the  opened  file  when  the  following  conditions  are
satisfied:  the  referenced drive has  a  directory  label  that  requests access date  and  time
stamping,  the  FCB  extent  field  is  equal  to  zero,  and  the  referenced  drive  is  Read-
Write.

Upon  return,  F_OPEN  returns  a  directory  code  in  register AL with  the  value OOH 
if  the  open  is  successful,  or  OFFH if the  file  is not  found.  Register  AH  is  set  to  0  in
both  of  these  cases.  If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is  encountered,  the  F_OPEN
system  call  performs  different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to
the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If the  BDOS  Error  mode  is in  the  default  mode,  the
system  displays  a  message  identifying  the  error  at  the  console  and  terminates  the
process.  Otherwise,  F_OPEN  returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL  set  to
OFFH  and  register  AH  set to  one  of  the  following physical  or  extended  error  codes:

OlH-Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
04H - Invalid  Drive  : drive select  error
05H  - File is open  by  another  process  or  by  the
current  process  in  an  incompatible mode

07H - Password  Error
09H-Illegal  ? in  FCB 
OAH - Open  File Limit Exceeded
OBH - No  Room  in  System  Lock  List

^^

.

6-90

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  PARSE

F  PARSE

Parse  An  ASCII String
And  Initialize An  FCB

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

098H  (152)
PFCB Address  -  Offset
PFCB Address  - Segment

OFFFFH  if error
0  if end  of  filename  string

end  of  line

address  of  next  item  to

parse
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

BX:
CX:

FILENAME

FCBADR

Figure  6-6.  PFCB - Parse Filename Control  Block

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-91

F_PARSE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Field 

FILENAME 

FCBADR 

Table  6-11.  PFCB Field Deflations

Description

Offset  of  an  ASCII file specification  to  parse.  The  offset  is rel-
ative  to  the  same  Data  Segment  as the  PFCB.

Offset  of  a File Control  Block to  initialize. The  offset  is relative
to  the  same  Data  Segment  as the  PFCB.

The  F_PARSE  system  call  parses  an  ASCII  file  specification  (FILENAME)  and
prepares  a  File Control  Block  (FCB).  The  calling process  passes  the  address  of  a  data
structure  called  the  Parse  Filename  Control  Block,  (PFCB)  in  registers  DX  and  DS.
The  PFCB  contains  the  offset  of  the  ASCII  filename  string  followed  by  the  offset of
the  target  FCB.

F_PARSE  assumes  the file specification  to  be in the  following  form

{D:} FILENAME  {.TYP} {;PASSWORD}

where  those  items  enclosed  in  curly brackets  are  optional.

The  F_PARSE  system  call  parses  the  first  file  specification  it  finds  in  the  input
string.  First  of  all,  it  eliminates leading  blanks  and  tabs.  F_PARSE then  assumes  the
file specification  ends  on  the  first  delimiter  it  encounters  that  is out  of  context  with
the  specific  field  it  is  parsing.  For  instance,  if  it  finds  a  colon  (:), and  it  is  not  the
second  character  of the file specification,  the  colon  delimits the  whole  file  specification.

6-92

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F  PARSE

The  F_PARSE  system  call  recognizes  the  following  characters  as  delimiters:

space
tab 
return 
null
; 
= 
< 
> 

: 
, 
| 
[ 
] 

' 
,,-  , 

, 

j 

, 

-,i 

•

, 

,N  t  ,

(semicolon)  - except  before  password  L  Id
(equal) 
(less  than)
(greater  than)
(period)  -  except  after  filename  and  before filetype
(colon)  - except  before filename and  after drive
(comma)
(vertical bar)
(left  square  bracket)
(right  square  bracket) 

«  •, 

' 

,  • 

fr\

i  ^r\ 

•

If  the  F_PARSE  system  call encounters  a nongraphic  character  in  the  range  1  through
31  not  listed  above,  it treats  the  character  as an  error.

The  F_PARSE  system  call  initializes the  specified FCB as  shown  in Table  6-12.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-93

F  PARSE

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Byte  number

byte  0

byte  1-8

byte  9-11

Table  6-12.  FCB Initialization

Explanation

The  drive  field  is  set  to  the  specified  drive.  If the  drive  is  not
specified,  the  default  value  is  used.  0 = default,  1 = A,  2 = B,
etc.

The  name  is  set  to  the  specified filename. All letters  are  con-
verted  to  upper-case.  If the  name is not  eight characters  long,
the remaining bytes in the filename field are padded with blanks.
If  the  filename  has  an  asterisk  (*), all  remaining bytes  in  the
filename field are filled in with question  marks (?).  The  system
call  returns  an  error  if  the  filename  is  more  than  eight  bytes
long.

The  type  is set  to  the  specified  filetype.  If no  type  is specified,
the  type  field  is initialized to  blanks.  All letters  are  converted
to  upper-case.  If  the  type  is  not  three  characters  long,  the
remaining  bytes  in  the filetype field are  padded  with  blanks.
If  an  asterisk  is  encountered,  all  remaining bytes  are  filled  in
with  question  marks.  The  system  call  returns  an  error  if  the
type field is more  than  3  bytes  long.

byte  12-15

Filled  in  with  zeros.

byte  16-23

The password field is set to the specified password. If no pass-
word  is specified, this field is initialized to  blanks. If the  pass-
word  is not  eight  characters  long, remaining bytes are  padded
with  blanks. All letters  are converted  to upper-case.  The system
call  returns  an  error  if the  password  field  is  more  than  eight
bytes  long.

byte 24-31

Reserved  for  system  use.

6-94

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_PARSE

If  an  error  occurs,  F_PARSE  returns  OFFFFH in  register AX  indicating  the  error.

On  a  successful  parse,  the  F_PARSE system  call  checks  the  next  item  in  the FILE-
NAME  string.  It  scans  for  the  first  character  that  follows  trailing blanks  and  tabs. If
the  character  is a  line feed  (OAH), a  carriage return  (ODH), or  a  null character  (OOH),
it  returns  a  0  indicating  the  end  of  the  FILENAME string.  If the  next  character  is a
delimiter,  it  returns  the  address  of  the  delimiter. If the  next  character  is not  a  delim-
iter, it  returns  the  address  of  the first trailing blank  or  tab.

If  the  F_PARSE  system  call  is  to  be  used  to  parse  a  subsequent  filename  in  the
FILENAME  string,  the  returned  address  should  be  advanced  over  the  delimiter before
placing  it  in  the  PFCB.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a list  of error  codes returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-95

F  PASSWD

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  PASSWD

Establish  A  Default  Password
For  File Access

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

06AH  (106)
Password  Address -  Offset
Password  Address - Segment

The  F_PASSWD  system  call allows  a  process  to  specify  a  password  value before  a
file protected  by  the  password  is accessed.  When  the file system accesses a  password-
protected  file,  it  checks  the  current  DMA,  and  the  default  password  for  the  correct
value.  If either  value  matches  the file's password,  full  access  to  the file is  allowed.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  maintains  a  default  password  for  each  process  running  on
the  system.  A  new  process  inherits  its  initial  default  password  from  its  parent,  the
process  creating  the  new  process.

Note:  changing  the  default  password  does  not  affect  other  processes  currently run-
ning  on  the  system.

To  make  an  F_PASSWD  call,  the  calling  process  passes  the  address  of  an  eight-

byte field containing  the password.

6-96

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  RANDREC

F  RANDREC

Return  The  Random  Record  Number  Of The
Next  Record  To  Access  In A Disk  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

024H  (36)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB  Address - Segment

Returned  Values:
Random  Record  Field of  FCB Set

The  F_RANDREC  system  call  returns  the  Random  Record  Number  of  the  next
record  to  be  accessed  from  a  file  that  has  been  read  or  written  sequentially  to  a
particular point. The  system  call  returns this value in the  Random  Record field, bytes
RO,  Rl,  and  R2,  of  the  addressed  FCB.  The  F_RANDREC  system call  can  be  useful
in  two  ways.

First,  it  is often  necessary  to  initially  read  and  scan  a  sequential file to  extract  the
positions  of  various  key fields. As each  key  is encountered,  F_RANDREC  is called  to
compute  the  random  record  position  for  the  data  corresponding  to  this  key.  If  the
data  unit  size  is  128  bytes,  the  resulting  record  number  minus  one  is  placed  into  a
table  with  the  key  for  later retrieval.

After  scanning  the  entire  file  and  tabularizing the  keys  and  their  record  numbers,
you  can  move  directly  to  a  particular  record  by performing a  random  read  using the
corresponding  Random  Record  Number  that  was  saved  earlier. The  scheme  is easily
generalized  when  variable  record  lengths  are  involved,  because  the  program  need
only  store  the  buffer-relative  byte  position  along  with  the  key and  record  number in
order  to  find  the  exact  starting  position  of the  keyed  data  at  a  later  time.

F_RANDREC  can  also  be  used  when  switching  from  a  sequential read  or  write  to
a  random  read  or  write.  A  file  is  sequentially  accessed  to  a  particular  point  in  the
file, F_RANDREC  is  called  to  set  the  record  number,  and  subsequent  random  read
and  write  operations  continue  from  the  next  record  in the file.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-97

F  READ

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  READ

Read  Records Sequentially
From  A  Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

014H  (20)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_READ  system  call  reads  the  next  1 to  128  128-byte  records  from  a file into
memory,  beginning  at  the  current  DMA  address.  The  BDOS Multisector  Count  (refer
to  the  F_MULTISEC  system  call)  determines  the  number of  records  to  be  read.  The
default  is one  record.  The  addressed  FCB must  have  been  previously  activated  by  an
F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE  system  call.

F_READ  reads  each  record  from  the  current  record  (CR) field in  the  FCB, relative
to  the  current  extent,  then  automatically  increments  the  CR field to  the  next  record
position.  If the  CR  field  overflows,  then  F_READ  automatically opens  the  next  logi-
cal  extent  and  resets  the  CR  field  to  zero  for  the  next  read  operation.  The  calling
process  must  set  the  CR  field  to  OOH following  the  open  call  if  the  intent  is to  read
sequentially  from  the  beginning  of  the file.

6-98

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_READ

Upon  return,  the  F_READ  system  call  sets  register  AL to  zero  if the  read  operation
is  successful.  Otherwise,  register  AL  contains  an  error  code  identifying  the  error  as
«• 
shown  below: 

• , '. 

. 

> 

,

01H-Reading  unwritten  data  (end-of-file)
08H-Record  locked  by  another  process
09H-Invalid FCB
OAH - FCB  Checksum  Error
OBH-Unlocked  file  verification  error 

OFFH  -  Physical error;  refer  to  register  AH

' 

• 

i .'

The  system  call returns error  code  01H  if no  data  exists at  the  next  record  position
of  the file. The  no  data  situation  is usually  encountered  at  the  end  of  a  file.  However,
it  can  also  occur  if you  try  to  read  a  data  block  that  has  not  been  previously written
or  an  extent  that  has  not  been  created.  These  situations are  usually  restricted  to files
created  or  appended  with  the  BDOS  random  write  system  calls  (F_WRITERAND
and  F_WRITEZF).

The  system  call  returns  error  code  08H  if  the  calling  process  attempts  to  read  a
record  locked  by  another  process  with  an  exclusive  lock.  This  error  code  is  only
returned  for files opened  in  Unlocked  mode.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  09H  if  the  FCB  is  invalidated  by  a  previous

F_CLOSE  system  call  that  returned  an  error.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OBH  if  the  BDOS  cannot  locate  the  FCB's
directory  entry  when  attempting  to  verify  that  the  referenced FCB contains  current
information.  The  system  call  only  returns  this  error  for  files  opened  in  Unlocked
mode.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-99

F_READ 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OFFH if a  physical error  is encountered  and  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  one  of  the  return  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system
call).  If  the  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  file  system  displays a  message  at
the  console  identifying  the  physical  error  and  terminates  the  calling process.  When
the  system  call  returns  a  physical  error  to  the  calling  process,  it  is  identified  by
register  AH  as  shown  below:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error

On  all  error  returns,  except  for  physical error  returns  (AL  =  255),  F_READ  sets
register  AH  to  the  number  of  records  successfully  read  before the  error  was encoun-
tered.  This  value can  range  from  0  to  127 depending on  the  current BDOS Multisec-
tor  Count. It  is always  set to  zero when  the Multisector  Count  is equal  to  one.

6-1UU

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  READRAND

F  READRAND

Read  Random  Records
From  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

021H  (33)
FCB Address -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as AX

The  F_READRAND  system  call  is similar  to  the  F_READ system  call except  that
the  read  operation  takes  place  at  a  particular  Random  Record  Number,  selected  by
the  24-bit  value  constructed  from  the  three-byte,  RO, Rl,  R2,  field  beginning  at
position  33  of  the  FCB.  Note  that  the  sequence  of  24  bits  is  stored  with  the  least
significant  byte  first,  RO, the  middle  byte  next,  Rl,  and  the  high  byte  last,  R2.  The
Random  Record  Number  can  range  from  0  to  262,143. This  corresponds  to  a maxi-
mum  value of  3  in  byte  R2.

To  read  a  file  with  the  F_READRAND  system  call,  the  calling process  must first
open  the  base  extent,  extent  0.  This  ensures that  the  FCB is properly  initialized for
subsequent  random  access  operations.  The  base  extent  might  or  might  not  contain
any  allocated  data.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-101

F_READRAND 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

The  F_READRAND  system  call  reads  the  record  specified  by  the  random  record
field  into  the  current  DMA  address.  F_READRAND  automatically sets  the  FCB
extent  and  current sector  number values, EX and  CR, but  unlike the F_READ system
call,  it  does  not  advance  the  current  record  number. Thus,  a  subsequent F_READ-
RAND  call  rereads  the  same  record.  After  a  random  read  operation,  a  file  can  be
accessed  sequentially, starting  from  the  current  randomly accessed  position.  How-
ever,  the  last  randomly  accessed  record  is  reread  or  rewritten  when  switching  from
random  to  sequential  mode.

• r

If  the  BDOS  Multisector  count  is  greater  than  one  (refer  to  the  F_MULTISEC
system  call), F_READRAND  reads  multiple consecutive records  into  memory begin-
ning  at  the  current DMA.  F_READRAND automatically increments the  RO, Rl,  R2
field of  the  FCB to  read  each  record.  However,  it restores the  FCB's Random Record
Number  to  the first record's  value  upon  return to  the  calling process.

Upon  return,  F_READRAND  sets  register  AL  to  OOH if  the  read  operation  is

successful.  Otherwise,  register AL contains one  of  the  following  error  codes:

01H-Reading  unwritten data
03H - Cannot  close  current extent
04H - Seek to  unwritten extent 
06H  - Random  record  number  out  of  range 
08H - Record  locked  by another  process
OAH - FCB Checksum Error
OBH - Unlocked file verification  error
OFFH - Physical error  refer to  register  AH

;

•

The  system  call  returns  error  code  01H  when  it  accesses  a  data  block  not  previ-

ously  written.  This  may  indicate an  end-of-file  (EOF) condition.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  03 H  when  it  cannot  close  the  current  extent

prior  to  moving to  a  new  extent.

6-102

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

W

I 

i 

i 

j 

! 

. 

i 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_READRAND

The  system  call returns error  code  04H  when  a read  random  operation  accesses  an

extent  that  has not  been  created.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  06H  when  byte  35  (R2) of  the  referenced FCB

is  greater  than  3.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  08H  if  the  calling process  attempts  to  read  a
record  locked  by  another  process  with  an  exclusive lock.  This  error  code  is  only
returned  for  files  opened  in  Unlocked  mode.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OBH  if  the  BDOS  cannot  locate  the  FCB's
directory  entry  when  attempting  to  verify  that  the  referenced  FCB contains  current
information.  The  system  call  only returns  this error  for files open  in Unlocked  mode.

i 

. 

•  •

The  system  call returns error  code  OFFH  if a  physical error  is encountered and  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  one  of  the  return  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE system
call).  If  the  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  file  system displays a  message  at
the  console  identifying  the  physical error  and  terminates the  calling  process.  When  a
physical  error  is returned  to  the  calling process,  it  is identified  by  the  four  low-order
bits  of  register  AH  as  shown  below:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive  select  error

On  all error  returns except  for  physical error  returns, AL  =  255,  F_READRAND
sets  register  AH  to  the  number  of  records  successfully  read  before  the  error  was
encountered.  This  value  can  range  from  0  to  127  depending  on  the  current  BDOS
Multisector  Count.  It  is  always  set  to  zero  when  the  Multisector  Count  is equal  to
one.

i  ,.  ' 

r[
'H

> 

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-103

F  RENAME

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  RENAME

Rename  A Disk  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

017H  (23)
FCB  Address  - Offset
FCB Address - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
;,-
Same  as  AX 

s  ' 

The  F_RENAME  system  call  uses  the  referenced FCB to  change  all  directory  entries
of  the  file  specified  by  the  drive  and  filename  in  bytes  0  to  11  of  the  FCB  to  the
filename  specified  in  bytes  17 through  27.

If  the file specified by  the  first  filename  is password-protected,  the  correct  password
must  be  placed  in  the  first  eight  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  buffer,  or  have  been
previously  established  as  the  default password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD  system  call).

The  calling  process  must  also  ensure  that  the  filenames  specified  in  the  FCB  are
valid  and  unambiguous,  and  that  the  new  filename  does  not  already  exist  on  the
drive.  F_RENAME  uses  the  drive  code  at  byte  0  of  the  FCB to  select  the  drive.  The
drive  code  at  byte  16 of  the  FCB is  ignored.

Interface  attribute  F5'  specifies  whether  an  extended  file  lock  is  to  be  maintained

after  the  F_ATTRIB  call  as  shown  below:

F5' =  0 - Do not  maintain  an extended file lock  (default)
F5'=  1 - Maintain  an extended file lock

6-104

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_RENAME

If  F5'  is  set  and  the  referenced  FCB  specifies  a  file  with  an  extended  file  lock,  the
calling  process  maintains the  lock  on  the  file.  Otherwise,  the  file  becomes  available
to  other  processes  on  the  system.  Section  2.11  describes  extended  file  locking  in
detail.

A  process  can  rename  a  file  that  it  has  open  if  the  file  is  open  in  Locked  mode.
However,  the  BDOS  returns  a  checksum error  if  the  process  subsequently references
the  file  with  a  system  call  requiring  an  open  FCB.  A  file  open  in  Read-Only  or
Unlocked  mode  cannot  be  renamed  by any  process.

Renaming  an  open  file  can  adversely affect  the  performance of  the  calling process.

For  this  reason,  you  should  close  an  open file before you  rename  it.

Upon  return,  the  F_RENAME  system  call  returns  a  directory  code  in  register  AL
with  the  value OOH if  the  rename  is  successful,  or  OFFH  if the  file  named  by  the  first
filename  in  the  FCB  is not  found. Register AH  is set  to  OOH in  both  of  these cases. If
a  physical  or  extended  error  is  encountered,  the  F_RENAME  system  call  performs
different  actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE
system  call).  If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  system  displays a
message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error,  and  terminates the  process.  Otherwise,
it  returns  to  the  calling process  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  with  register  AH
set to  one  of  the  following physical  or  extended  error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
03H  - Read/Only  File
04H  - Invalid  Drive  : drive  select  error
05H  - File open  by  another  process
07H  -  Password  Error 
08H  - File Already  Exists
09H  -  Illegal  ? in  FCB

> ", 

.  .!

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-105

F  SFIRST

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  SFIRST

Find  The  First  File That Matches
The  Specified FCB

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

011H  (17)
FCB Address  - Offset
FCB Address  -  Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_SFIRST  system  call  scans  the  directory  for  a  match  with  the  referenced
FCB.  Two  types  of  searches  can  be  performed.  For  standard  searches,  the  calling
process  initializes bytes  0  through  12  of  the  referenced FCB,  with  byte  0  specifying
the  drive  directory  to  be searched,  bytes  1 through  11  specifying  the file or files to  be
searched  for,  and  byte  12  specifying  the  extent.  Byte  12  is  usually set  to  OOH. An
ASCII  question  mark  (63,  or  03FH  hexadecimal) in  any  of  the  bytes  1  through  12
matches  all entries  on  the  directory  in  the  corresponding position.  This  facility,  called
ambiguous  file  reference,  can  be  used  to  search  for  multiple files on  the  directory.
When  called  in  the  standard  mode,  F_SFIRST  scans  for  the  first  file  entry  in  the
specified  directory  that  matches  the  FCB and  belongs  to  the  current  user  number.

The  F_SFIRST  system  call  also  initializes  the  F_SNEXT  system  call.  After  the
search  system  call  has  located  the  first  directory  entry  matching  the  referenced  FCB,
F_SNEXT  can  be  called  repeatedly  to  locate  all remaining matching entries.  In  terms
of  execution  sequence,  however,  the  F_SNEXT  call  must  follow  either  a  F_SFIRST
or  F_SNEXT  call  with  no  other  intervening BDOS file-access system  calls.

6-106

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_SFIRST

If  byte  0  of  the  referenced  FCB  is  set  to  a  question  mark,  F_SFIRST  ignores  the
remainder  of  the  referenced  FCB and  locates  the  first  directory  entry  residing on  the
current  default  drive.  All remaining directory  entries can  be  located  by  making mul-
tiple  F_SNEXT  calls.  This  type  of  search  operation  is not  usually  made  by  applica-
tion  programs,  but  it  does  provide  complete  flexibility  to  scan  all  directory  entries.
Note  that  this  type  of  search  operation  must  be  performed  to  access  a  drive's  direc-
tory  label.

Upon  return,  the  F_SFIRST  system  call returns a directory  code  in register AL with
the  value  0  to  3  if  the  search  is  successful,  or  OFFH if a  matching  directory  entry  is
not  found.  Register  AH  is  set  to  zero  in  both  of  these  cases.  For  successful  searches,
the  current  DMA  is  also  filled  with  the  directory  record  containing  the  matching
entry,  and  the  relative starting  position  is AL  * 32.  The  directory  information can  be
extracted  from  the  buffer  at  this  position.

If  the  directory  has  been  initialized  for  date  and  time  stamping,  then  an  FCB
resides  in  every  fourth  directory  entry,  and  successful  directory  codes  are  restricted
to  the  values  0  to  2.  For  successful searches,  if the  matching  directory  record  is  an
extent  zero  entry,  and  if an  SFCB resides  at  offset  96  within the  current DMA  buffer,
then  the  contents  of  (DMA  Address  +96)  =  021H,  and  the  SFCB contains  the  time
and  date  stamp  information  and  password  mode  for  the  file.  This  information  is
located  at  the  relative starting position  of  97 + (AL *  10) within  the  current  DMA  in
the  following  format:

0  - 3  : Create  or  Access Date  and  Time  Stamp Field
4  - 7  : Update  Date  and  Time  Stamp Field
8 

:  Password  Mode  Field 

-.,-.••

Refer  to  Section  2.8  for  more  information about SFCBs.

If  a  physical  error  is  encountered,  the  F_SFIRST  system  call  performs  different
actions  depending  on  the  BDOS error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).
If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  system  displays  a  message
identifying  the  error  at  the  console  and  terminates the  calling  process.  Otherwise,  it
returns  to  the  calling  process  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register  AH  set  to
one  of  the  following physical error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent  error
04H  -  Invalid  Drive : drive select  error

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-107

F  SIZE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  SIZE

Compute  The  Size  Of  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:

023H  (35)
FCB Address -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Register  AL:  Directory  Code

Physical  or  Extended  Error

AH: 
BX:  Same as  AX
Random  Record  Field of  FCB Set

The  F_SIZE  system  call  determines the  virtual file size. This  is  the  address  of  the
record  immediately following the  end  of  the file. The  virtual size of  a file corresponds
to  the  physical  size  if  the  file  is  written  sequentially. If  the  file  is  written  in  random
mode,  gaps  might  exist  in  the  allocation,  and  the  file  might  contain  fewer  records
than  the  indicated  size. For  example,  if a  single record  with  record  number 262,143,
the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  maximum,  is  written  to  a  file  using the  F_WRITERAND
system  call,  then  the  virtual size  of  the file is 262,144  records  even though  only  one
data  block  is actually  allocated.

To  compute  file  size,  the  calling process  passes  the  address  of  an  FCB with  bytes
RO,  Rl,  and  R2  present.  The  F_SIZE  system call sets  the  random  record field of  the
FCB to  the  Random  Record  Number +1 of  the  last  record  in  the file. If the  R2  byte
is  set  to  04H,  and  RO and  Rl  are  both  zero,  then  the  file  contains  the  maximum
record  count, 262,144.

6-108

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_SIZE

A  process  can  append  data  to  the  end  of  an  existing file by  calling F_SIZE  to  set
the  random  record  position  to  the  end  of  file,  and  then  performing  a  sequence  of
random  writes.

Note: 
the file need  not  be open  in order  to  use  F_SIZE. However,  if the file is  open
in  Locked  mode  and  it  has  been  extended  by  the  calling process,  the  file  must  be
closed  before  F_SIZE  is  called.  Otherwise,  F_SIZE  returns  an  incorrect  file  size.
F_SIZE  returns  the  correct  size  for  files  open  in  Unlocked  mode  and  Read-Only
mode.

Upon  return,  F_SIZE  returns  a  OOH in  register  AL  if  the  file  specified  by  the
referenced  FCB  is  found,  or  a  OFFH  in  register  AL  if  the  file  is  not  found.  Register
AH  is  set  to  OOH in  both  cases.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is  encountered,  F_SIZE  performs different  actions
depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default  mode,  the  system  displays  a  message  at  the
console  identifying  the  error  and  terminates  the  process.  Otherwise,  F_SIZE  returns
to  the  calling process  with  register  AL set to  OFFH  and  register AH  set to  one  of  the
following  physical or  extended  error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent error 
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error
09H  - Illegal  ? in  FCB

;

,• ~

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-109

F  SNEXT

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

.  F  SNEXT

Find  A Subsequent  File That  Matches
The  Specified  FCB  Of  A Previous
F  SFIRST  Or  F  SNEXT

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

012H  (18)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as AX

The  F_SNEXT  system  call  is identical  to  F_SFIRST  except  that  the  directory  scan
continues  from  the  last  entry  that  was  matched.  F_SNEXT  returns  a  directory  code
in  register  AL, analogous  to  F_SFIRST.

in  execution  sequence,  a  F_SNEXT  call  must  follow  either  a  F_SFIRST  or

Note: 
another  F_SNEXT with  no  other  intervening BDOS file-access system  calls.

6-110

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

F  TIMEDATE

F  TIMEDATE

Return  File  Date Stamps
And  Password  Mode

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

066H (102)
FCB  Address -  Offset
FCB  Address - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_TIMEDATE  system  call  returns  the  time  and  date  stamp  information and
password  mode  for  the  specified  file  in  byte  12  and  bytes  24  through  31  of  the
specified  FCB.  The  calling  process  passes  the  address  of  an  FCB in  which  the  drive,
filename, and  type fields have been defined.

If  F_TIMEDATE  is  successful,  it  sets  the  following fields in  the  referenced FCB

byte  12

password  mode field

bit  7 - Read  mode
bit  6  - Write  mode
bit  5  - Delete  mode

Byte  12 equal  to  0  indicates  the file has not  been  assigned  a  password.

byte  24  - 27  XFCB  Create  or  Access time  stamp field
byte 2 8 - 31  XFCB  Update  time  stamp field

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-111

F_TIMEDATE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Upon  return,  F_TIMEDATE  returns  a directory  code  in register AL with  the value
OOH  if  the  operation  is  successful, or  OFFH if the  specified file is not  found.  Register
AH  is  set  to  OOH in  both  of  these  cases.  If  a  physical or  extended  error  is  encoun-
tered,  F_TIMEDATE performs  different  actions  depending on  the  BDOS Error  mode
(refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is  in  the  default
mode,  the  system  displays  a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  error  and  termi-
nates  the  calling  process.  Otherwise,  F_TIMEDATE  returns  to  the  calling  process
with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register  AH  set  to  one  of  the  following physical
error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select error
09H  - Illegal  ? in  FCB

6-112

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  TRUNCATE

F  TRUNCATE

Truncate  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
Register  DX:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
Register  AH:
Register  BX:

063H (99)
FCB Address  -  Offset

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_TRUNCATE system  call  sets  the  last  record  of a file to  the  Random  Record
Number  contained  in  the  referenced  FCB.  The  calling program  passes  the  address  of
the  FCB in  register  DX  with  byte  0  of  the  FCB specifying  the  drive,  bytes  1  through
11  specifying the  filename  and  filetype,  and  bytes  33  through  35  (RO, Rl,  and  R2)
specifying  the  last  record  of  the file. The  last  record  number is a  24-bit  value,  stored
with  the  least  significant byte first  (RO),  the  middle byte next  (Rl),  and  the  high  byte
last  (R2). This  value can  range  from  0  to  262,143  (03FFFFH).

If  the  file  specified  by  the  referenced  FCB  is password-protected,  the  correct  pass-
word  must  have  been  placed  in  the  first  eight  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  buffer,  or
have  been  previously  established  as  the  default  password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD
system  call).

Interface  attribute  F5'  specifies  whether  an  extended  file  lock  is  to  be  maintained

after  the  F_TRUNCATE  call, as shown  below:

F5'=  0  - Do  not  maintain an  extended file lock  (default)
F5'=  1 - Maintain  an extended file lock

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-113

FJTRUNCATE 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

If  F5'  is  set  and  the  referenced  FCB  specifies  a  file  with  an  extended  file  lock,  the
calling  process  maintains  the  lock  on  the  file.  Otherwise,  the  file  becomes available
to  other  processes  on  the  system.  Section  2.11  describes  extended  file  locking  in
detail.

F_TRUNCATE  requires  that  the  Random  Record  Number field of  the referenced
FCB specify a  value less  than  the  current file size.  In addition,  if the file is sparse,  the
random  record  field  must  specify  a  region  of  the file where data  exists.

A  process  can  truncate  a  file  that  it  currently has  open  if  the  file  is  opened  in
locked  mode,  and  the file has  not  been  extended  during the  open  session.  However,
the  BDOS  returns  a  checksum error  if  the  process  makes  a  subsequent reference  to
the  file  with  a  BDOS  system  call  requiring an  open  FCB. A process  cannot  truncate
files open  in R/O  or  Unlocked  mode.

Truncating  an  open  file  is  not  recommended  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.
F_TRUNCATE  truncates  a file based  on  the  file's  state  in  the  directory.  If  a  process
attempts  to  truncate  at  a region  of the file that  has been allocated  in memory but  has
not  been  recorded  in  the  directory,  F_TRUNCATE  returns  an  error.  Even  when
successful,  an  open  file  truncate  can  adversely  affect  the  performance of  the calling
process. For  these  reasons, you  should  close  an  open file before you  truncate it.

After  completion,  F_TRUNCATE  returns  a  directory  code  in  register AL with  the
value  OOH if  the  operation  is  successful  or  OFFH  if  the  file  is  not  found  or  if  the
record  number  is invalid. In  both  cases  register AH  is set to OOH.

6-114

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_TRUNCATE

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is  encountered,  F_TRUNCATE  performs  different
actions  depending  on  the  BDOS  Error  mode  (refer  to  F_ERRMODE).  If the  BDOS
Error  mode  is in  the  default  mode,  a message identifying  the error  is displayed  at  the
console  and  the  program  is  terminated.  Otherwise,  F_TRUNCATE  returns  to  the
calling  program  with  register  AL  set  to  OFFH  and  register  AH  set  to  one  of  the
following  physical  or  extended  error  codes:

01H-Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H-Read/Only Disk
03H-Read/Only  File
04H - Invalid Drive : drive select  error
05H - File  Currently Open
06H - Close  Checksum Error
07H - Password  Error
08H - File Already Exists
09H-Illegal  ? in  FCB
OAH - Open  File Limit Exceeded 
OBH - No  Room  in  System Lock List

. 

- 

,  '

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-115

F  UNLOCK

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

F  UNLOCK

Unlock  Records  In  A  Disk  File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

02BH  (43)
FCB  Address  -  Offset
FCB Address  - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_UNLOCK  system  call  unlocks  one  or  more  consecutive  records previously
locked  by  the  F_LOCK  system  call.  This  system  call  is only  supported  for files open
in  Unlocked  mode.  If  it  is  called  for  a  file  open  in  Locked  or  Read-Only  mode,  no
unlocking  action  occurs  and  a  successful  result  is  returned.  Record  locking  and
unlocking  is described  in  detail  in  Section  2.14.

The  calling process  passes  the  address  of  an  FCB  in  which  the  Random  Record
Field  is  filled  with  the  Random  Record  Number  of  the  first  record  to  be  unlocked.
The  number  of  records  to  be unlocked  is determined  by the  BDOS Multisector  Count
(refer  to  the  F_MULTISEC  system  call).  The  current  DMA  must  contain  the  2-byte
File  ID  returned  by  the  F_OPEN  system  call  when  the  referenced  FCB was  opened.
Note  that  the  File  ID  is  only  returned  by  F_OPEN  when  the  file  open  mode  is
Unlocked.

6-116

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

FJJNLOCK

If  interface attribute F5'  is set to  1, F_UNLOCK  unlocks all locked records belong-
ing  to  the  calling  process.  The  F_UNLOCK  interface  attribute  definition  is  listed
below:

F5'=  0  - Unlock records  specified  by  Random  Record

Number  and  BDOS Multisector  Count  (default)

F5'=  1 - Unlock  all locked  records. 

i;'.-

F_UNLOCK  ignores  the  FCB Random  Record  field  and  the  BDOS Multisector  Count
when  F5'  is  set. 

r 

• 

- 

>

F_UNLOCK  does  not  unlock a  record  that  is currently  locked by  another process.
However,  the  system  call  does  not  return  an  error  if  a  process  attempts  to  do  that.
Thus,  if  the  Multisector  Count  is  greater than  one,  F_UNLOCK  unlocks all  records
locked  by  the  calling process,  skipping those  records  locked  by other  processes.

Some  F_UNLOCK  requests require a  new  entry  in  the  BDOS system Lock  List. If
there  is  insufficient  space  in  the  system Lock  List  to  satisfy  the  F_UNLOCK request,
or  if  the  process  record  Lock  List  limit  is  exceeded,  then  F_UNLOCK  does  not
unlock  any  records  and  returns  an  error  code  to  the  calling process.

Upon  return,  F_UNLOCK  sets  register  AL  to  OOH if  the  unlock  operation  was

successful.  Otherwise,  register AL contains one  of  the  following  error  codes:

01H-Reading  unwritten  data
03H - Cannot  close  current  extent
04H - Seek to  unwritten  extent
06H - Random  Record  Number  out  of  range
OAH - FCB  Checksum  Error
OCH - Process  record  Lock  List limit exceeded
ODH-Invalid  File  ID
OEH - No  room  in  system  Lock  List
OFFH - Physical error  refer  to  register  AH

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-117

F_UNLOCK 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  system  call  returns  error  code  01H  when  it  accesses  a  data  block  which  has

not  been  previously  written.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  03 H  when  it  cannot  close  the  current  extent

prior  to  moving to  a new  extent.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  04H  when  it  accesses  an  extent  that  has  not

been  created.

The  system call returns  error  code  06H  when  byte 35  (r2) of  the  referenced  FCB is

greater  than  3.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OCH  if  performing the  unlock  request  would
require that  the  process  consume more  than  the maximum allowed number of system
Lock  List entries.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  ODH when  an  invalid  File  ID  is  placed  at  the

beginning  of  the  current  DMA.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OEH  when  the  system  Lock  List  is  full  and

performing  the  unlock  request  would  require at  least one new entry.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OFFH  if  a  physical  error  was  encountered  and
the  BDOS  Error  mode  is one  of  the  return  modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system
call).  If  the  Error  mode  is  the  default  mode,  the  system  displays  a  message  at  the
console  identifying  the  physical error  and  terminates the  calling  process.  When  the 
system  call  returns  a  physical  error  to  the  calling process,  it  is  identified  by  register
AH  as shown  below:

,

01H  - Disk  I/O  Error  : permanent error
04H  - Invalid Drive : drive select  error

6-118

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  USERNUM

F  USERNUM

Set Or  Return  The  Calling  Process's
Default  User  Number

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

020H (32)
OFFH to  GET User Number
User  Number  to SET

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

Current  User Number  if  GET
Same as AL

A  process  can  change  or  interrogate  its  current  default  user  number  by  calling
F_USERNUM.  If register  DL  =  OFFH, then  the  system  call  returns  the  value of  this
user  number  in  register  AL. The  value can  range from  0  to  OFH. If register  DL  is  not
OFFH,  then  the  system  call  changes  the  default  user  number  to  the  value  in  DL,
module  01 OH (the high  nibble of  DL  is masked off).

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  a  new  process  inherits its initial default  user  number
from  its  parent,  the  process  creating  the  new  process.  Changing  the  default  user
number  does  not  change  the  user  code  of  the  parent.  On  the  other  hand,  all  child
processes  of  the  calling process  inherit the  new  user number.

This  convention  is demonstrated  by  the  operation  of  the  TMP.  When  a  command
is  typed,  a  new  process  is created  with  the  same  user  number as  that  of  the  TMP.  If
this  new  process  changes  its  user  number,  the  TMP  is  unaffected.  Once  the  new
process  terminates,  the  TMP  displays  the  same  user  number  in  its  prompt  that  it
displayed  before the  command  was  entered  and  the  child process  was  created.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-119

F  WRITE

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

F  WRITE

Write  Records  Sequentially
To  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

015H  (21)
FCB Address  -  Offset
FCB Address - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as AX

The  F_WRITE  system  call writes  1 to  128,  128-byte  data  records  beginning at the
current  DMA  address  into  the file named  by the  specified  FCB. The  BDOS Multisec-
tor  Count  (refer  to  the  F_MULTISEC  system  call)  determines  the  number  of  128-
byte  records  that  are  written.  The  default  is  one  record.  An  F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE
system  call must  have previously activated  the  referenced FCB.

F_WRITE  places  the  record  into  the file at  the  position  indicated  by the  CR  byte
of  the  FCB,  and  then  automatically increments the  CR  byte to  the  next  record  posi-
tion.  If  the  CR  field  overflows,  the  system  call  automatically  opens  or  creates  the
next  logical  extent  and  resets  the  CR  field  to  OOH in  preparation  for  the  next  write
operation.  If  F_WRITE  is  used  to  write  to  an  existing  file,  then  the  newly  written
records  overlay those  already  existing in the file. The  calling process  must  set the  CR
field  to  OOH following  an  F_OPEN  or  F_MAKE  system  call if  the  intent  is to  write
sequentially  from  the  beginning  of  the file.

6-120

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

F_WRITE

F_WRITE  makes  an  update  date  and  time  stamp  for  the  file  if  the  following
conditions  are  met:  the  referenced  drive  has  a  directory  label  that  requests  update
date  and  time  stamping,  and  the file has  not  already been  stamped  for  update  by  a
previous  F_MAKE  or  F_WRITE  system call.

Upon  return,  the  F_WRITE  system call sets  register AL to  OOH if the  write  opera-
tion  is successful.  Otherwise,  register  AL contains  an  error  code  identifying the  error
as shown  below:

• 

i  *  < 

,  ,  . •.

OlH-No  available directory  space 
02H - No  available data  block
08H  - Record  locked  by  another  process
09H  - Invalid FCB
OAH - FCB  Checksum Error
OBH - Unlocked file verification  error
OFFH - Physical error;  refer  to  register  AH

The  system  call  returns  error  code  01H  when  it  attempts  to  create  a  new  extent
that  requires  a  new  directory  entry,  and  no  available directory  entries  exist  on  the
selected  disk  drive.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  02H  when  it  attempts  to  allocate  a  new  data

block  to  the file, and  no  unallocated  data  blocks exist on  the  selected disk drive.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  08H  if the  calling process  attempts  to  write  to
a  record  locked  by  another  process,  or  a  record  locked  by  the  calling  process  in
shared  mode.  The  system call returns this error  only for files open  in Unlocked mode.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  09H  if  the  FCB  is  invalidated by  a  previous

F_CLOSE  system  call  that  returned  an  error.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-121

F_WRITE 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OBH  if  the  BDOS  cannot  locate  the  FCB's
directory  entry  when  attempting  to  verify  that  the  referenced  FCB contains  current
information.  The  system  call returns  this  error  only for files open  in  Unlocked  mode.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OFFH  if  a  physical error  was  encountered  and
the  BDOS  is  in  Return  Error  mode  or  Return  and  Display Error  mode  (refer  to  the
F_ERRMODE  system  call).  If  the  Error  mode  is  the  default  mode,  the  system  dis-
plays  a  message  at  the  console  identifying  the  physical  error  and  terminates  the
calling  process.  When  the  system  call  returns a  physical error  to  the  calling  process,
it  is identified by  register  AH  as  shown  below:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
03H - Read/Only  File or 

File  Opened  in  Read/Only Mode  or
File  password  protected  in Write  mode

04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive select  error

,

On  all error  returns,  except  for  physical error  returns  (AL =  255),  F_WRITE  sets
register  AH  to  the  number of  records  successfully  read  before  the  error  was  encoun-
tered.  This  value can  range  from  0 to  127,  depending on  the  current BDOS Multisec-
tor  Count. It  is always  set to  zero  when  the  Multisector  Count  is equal to  one.

6-122

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F WRITERAND

F  WRITERAND

Write  Random Records
To  A Disk File

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

022H (34)
FCB  Address -  Offset
FCB  Address - Segment

Error  Code
Physical  Error
Same  as  AX

The  F_WRITERAND  system  call  is analogous to  the  F_READRAND system call,
except  that  data  is  written  to  the  disk  from  the  current  DMA  address.  If  the  disk
extent  and/or  data  block  where  the  data  is to  be written is not  already allocated,  the
BDOS  automatically performs the  allocation  before  the write operation  continues.

In  order  to  write  to  a  file  using  the  F_WRITERAND  system  call,  the  calling
process  must  first  open  the  base  extent,  extent  0.  This  ensures that  the  FCB is  prop-
erly  initialized  for  subsequent  random  access  operations.  If  the  file  is  empty,  the
calling  process  must  create  the  base  extent  with  the  F_MAKE  system call  before  an
F_WRITERAND  system  call. The  base  extent  might  or  might  not  contain  data,  but
it  records  the  file  in  the  directory  so  that  it  can  be  displayed by  the  DIR  utility. If a
process  does  not  open  extent  0  and  allocates  data  to  some  other  extent,  the file is
invisible  to  the  DIR utility.

The  F_WRITERAND  system  call  sets  the  logical  extent  and  current  record  posi-
tions  to  correspond  with  the  random  record  being written,  but  does  not  change  the
Random  Record  Number.  Thus  sequential  read  or  write  operations  can  follow  a
random  write, with  the  current  record  being reread  or  rewritten  as the calling process
switches  from  random  to  sequential  mode.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-123

F_WRITERAND 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

F_WRITERAND makes  an  update  date  and  time stamp for the file if the following
conditions  are  met:  the  referenced  drive  has  a  directory  label  that  requests  update
date  and  time  stamping,  and  the file has  not  already been  stamped  for  update  by a
previous  F_MAKE or  F_WRITE  system call.

If  the  BDOS  Multisector  Count  is  greater  than  one  (refer  to  the  F_MULTISEC
system  call), the  F_WRITERAND  system call  reads  multiple  consecutive records  into
memory  beginning at  the  current  DMA  address. The  system call  automatically incre-
ments  the  RO, Rl,  and  R2 field of the  FCB to  write each record. However,  it restores
the  FCB's  Random  Record  Number  to  the  first  record's  value  upon  return  to  the
calling process.

Upon  return,  the  F_WRITERAND  system call  sets register AL to  OOH if the  write
operation  is  successful.  Otherwise,  register  AL  contains  one  of  the  following error
codes:

02H - No  available  data  block
03H - Cannot  close  current extent
05H-No  available directory  space
06H - Random  record  number out  of range
08H - Record  locked  by another  process
OAH - FCB Checksum  Error
OBH - Unlocked file verification  error
OFFH - Physical error  refer  to  register  AH

The  system  call  returns  error  code  02H  when  it  attempts  to  allocate  a  new  data

block  to  the file. No  unallocated  data  blocks  exist  on the selected  disk  drive.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  03H  when  it  cannot  close  the  current  extent

before  moving to  a  new  extent.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  05H  when  it  attempts  to  create  a  new  extent
that  requires a  new  directory  entry  and  no  available directory  entries  exist  on  the
selected  disk  drive.

6-124

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

F_WRITERAND

^/

The  system  call  returns  error  code  06H  when  byte  35  (R2) of  the  referenced FCB

is  greater  than  3.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  08H  if the  calling process  attempts  to  write  to
a  record  locked  by  another  process,  or  a  record  locked  by  the  calling  process  in
shared  mode.  The  system call returns this error only for files open  in Unlocked mode.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OAH  if  the  referenced  FCB  failed  the  FCB

checksum  test.

The  system  call  returns  error  code  OBH if  the  BDOS  cannot  locate  the  FCB's
directory  entry  when  attempting  to  verify  that  the  referenced  FCB contains  current
information.  The  system call returns this error  only for files open  in Unlocked  mode.

^^ 

The  system call returns  error  code  OFFH  if a physical error  is encountered and  the
BDOS  Error  mode  is in  one  of  the  return modes  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE system
call).  If the  Error  mode  is in  the  default mode,  the  system  displays a  message  at  the
console  identifying  the  physical  error  and  terminates  the  calling  process.  When  a
physical  error  is  returned  to  the  calling  process,  it  is  identified  by  register  AH  as
shown  below:

01H  - Disk I/O Error  : permanent error
02H  - Read/Only Disk
03H  -  Read/Only File  or 

File  Opened  in  Read/Only Mode  or
File  password  protected  in Write mode

04H  - Invalid  Drive : drive select error

•

. 

On  all  error  returns,  except  for  physical  error  returns  (AL  =  255),  F_WRITER-
AND  sets  register  AH  to  the  number  of  records  successfully  read  before  the  error
was  encountered.  This  value  can  range  from  0  to  127  depending  on  the  current
BDOS  Multisector  Count.  It  is  always  set  to  zero  when  the  Multisector  Count  is
equal  to  one.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-125

F  WRITEXFCB

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  WRITEXFCB

Write  Extended  File  Control Block
Of  A Disk  File

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

067H (103)
FCB  Address -  Offset
FCB Address - Segment

Directory  Code
Physical  or  Extended  Error
Same  as AX

The  F_WRITEXFCB  system call  creates  a  new  XFCB  or  updates  the  existing  XFCB
for  the  specified file. The  calling process  passes  the  address  of  an  FCB in  which  the
drive,  name,  type,  and  extent  fields  have  been  defined. The  FCB extent  field,  if  set,
specifies  the  password  mode  and  whether  a  new  password  is  to  be  assigned  to  the
file. The  format  of the  extent field byte is shown  below:

FCB byte  12  (EX)  XFCB password  mode

bit  7 - Read  mode
bit  6  - Write  mode
bit  5  - Delete  mode
bit  0  - assign  new password  to the file

If  the  FCB  is  currently  password-protected, 
the  correct  password  must  reside  in  the
first  8  bytes  of  the  current  DMA  or  have  been  previously established  as  the  default
password  (refer  to  the  F_PASSWD system call).  If bit  0 is set to  1, the  new  password
must  reside  in  the  second  8 bytes of  the  current  DMA.

6-126

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide 

F_WRITEXFCB

Note: 
the  F_WRITEXFCB  system  call  does  not  create  or  update  an  XFCB  if  the
XFCB  specifies  a  file  open  by  another  process.  However,  a  process  can  update  or
create  an  XFCB  for  a file that  it has  open  in Locked  mode.

Upon  return,  F_WRITEXFCB  returns  a  directory  code  in  register  AL  with  the
value  OOH if  the  XFCB  create  or  update  was  successful.  F_WRITEXFCB  returns
OFFH  in  register  AL  if  no  directory  label  existed  on  the  specified  drive,  or  the  file
specified  in  the  FCB was  not  found, or  no  space  existed  in  the  directory  to  create  an
XFCB,  or  if the  drive  is not  password  enabled.  F_WRITEXFCB  also  returns  OFFH if
passwords  are  not  enabled  by  the  specified  drive's directory  label. Register  AH  is set
to  OOH in  all  of  these  cases.

If  a  physical  or  extended  error  is encountered,  F_WRITEXFCB performs  different
actions  depending  on  the  BDOS Error  mode  (refer  to  the  F_ERRMODE  system call).
If  the  BDOS  Error  mode  is in  the  default  mode,  the  system displays a  message at  the
console  identifying the  error  and  terminates the  calling process.  Otherwise,  F_WRI-
TEXFCB  returns  to  the  calling process with  register  AL set to  OFFH and  register  AH
set to  one  of  the  following physical or  extended  error  codes:

01H  - Disk  I/O Error  : permanent  error
02H  - Read/Only  Disk
04H  - Invalid Drive  : drive  select  error
05H  - File open  by another  process,

or  open  in  Read-Only  or  Unlocked  mode

07H  - Password  Error
09H  - Illegal  ? in  FCB

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-127

F  WRITEZF

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

F  WRITEZF

Write  A Random  Record  To  A Disk File
And  Prefill  New  Data  Blocks With  Zeros

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

028H  (40)
FCB Address -  Offset
FCB Address - Segment

Error  Code
Physical Error
Same  as AX

The  F_WRITEZF  system  call  is  similar  to  the  F_WRITERAND system call, with
the  exception  that  it fills a previously unallocated data  block with zeros  (OOH)  before
writing  the  record.  If this  system  call has  been  used  to  create  a file, records  accessed
by  an  F_READRAND  system call  that  contain  all  zeros  identify  unwritten Random
Records.  Unwritten  random  records  in allocated  data  blocks of files created  using the
F_WRITERAND  system call  contain  uninitialized  data.

6-128

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  ATTACH

6.2.5  List  Device  I/O  System  Calls

L  ATTACH

Attach  To  The  Calling Process's
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL: 

09EH  (158)

The  L_ATTACH  system  call  attaches  the  default  list  device of  the  calling  process.
If  the  list  device  is  already attached  to  some  other  process,  the  calling  process relin-
quishes  the  CPU  until  the  other  process  detaches  from  the  list  device. When  the  list
device  becomes  free,  and  the  calling  process  is  the  highest  priority  process  waiting
for  the  list  device, the  attach  operation  occurs.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

6-129

L  CATTACH

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  CATTACH

Conditionally  Attach  To  The
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OA1H  (161)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  if attach  'OK'
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  L_CATTACH  system  call attaches  the  default  list device of  the  calling process

only  if the  list device  is currently available.

If  the  list  device  is currently  attached  to  another  process,  the  system call  returns  a
value  of  OFFH,  indicating  that  the  list  device  could  not  be  attached.  The  system  call
returns  a  value of  OOH to  indicate  that  either the  list device is already attached  to  the
process, or  that  it was  unattached,  and  a  successful  attach  operation  was  made.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-130

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  DETACH

L  DETACH

Detach  The  Calling  Process's
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

09FH  (159)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  if detach  'OK'
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as AX
Error  Code

The  L_DETACH  system call  detaches  the  default  list  device of  the  calling process.

If  the  list device is not  currently attached,  no  action  takes place.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error codes returned  in CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-131

L  GET

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  GET

Return  The  Calling  Process's
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OA4H  (164)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
BL:

List  Device  Number
Same  as AL

The  L_GET  system  call  returns  the  default list  device number  of  the  calling  process.

6-132

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  SET

L  SET

Set The  Calling Process's
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

OAOH  (160)
List  Device

Returned  Values:
Register  CX:

Error  Code

The  L_SET  system  call  sets  the  default  list device for  the  calling  process.

Refer  to  Table 6-5  for  a list  of error codes returned in CX.

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-133

L  WRITE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

L  WRITE

Write  A Character  To  The
Default  List Device

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

05H  (5)
Character

The  L_WRITE  system  call  writes  the  specified  character  to  the  default list  device
of  the  calling process.  Before writing the  character,  the  system internally calls L_AT-
TACH  to  verify  that  the  calling process owns  its default list  device.

6-134

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

L  WRITEBLK

L  WRITEBLK

Send  Specified  Character
String To  Default List Device

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  070H (112)
Register  DX:  CHCB Address

L_WRITEBLK  sends  the  character  string  specified  in  the  Character  Control  Block
(CHCB)  and  addressed  in  register pair  DX  to  the  logical list  device, LST:. The  CHCB
format  is

bytes  0  -  1  :  Offset  of  character  string 
bytes  2  - 3  : Segment  of character  string
bytes  4  - 5  : Length  of character  string to  print

.  .

6.2.6  Memory  System Calls

There  are  two  classes  of Memory  system  calls in Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The first class
supports  the  MP/M-86  memory  allocation  scheme  and  contains  two  system  calls,
M_ALLOC  and  M_FREE.  The  second  class contains  six system calls, MC_ABSMAX,
MC_ALLFREE,  MC_ALLOC,  MC_ABSALLOC,  MC_FREE,  and  MC_MAX.  These
system  calls support  the  CP/M-86  memory  allocation  scheme.

Note: 

the  CP/M-86  memory  calls  are  also  supported  under  MP/M-86.

Many  of  the  Memory  system  calls  use  the  Memory  Control  Block  (MCB)  or  the

Memory  Parameter  Block  (MPB) to  pass  parameters  to  and  from  the  operating sys-
tem.  The  format,  structure  and  example  programming  equates  for  these  data  struc-
tures  are  presented  below,  along  with  example  listings.

BASE

LENGTH 

I  EXT
+ •

Figure  6-7.  MCB - Memory  Control  Block

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-135

L  WRTTEBLK

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

Field

BASE

Table 6-13.  MCB Field  Definitions

Definition

The  Segment  Address  of  the  beginning of  the  specified  memory
segment.

LENGTH

Length  of  the  Memory  Segment  in  paragraphs.  The  LENGTH
field is set to  the  number  of paragraphs  wanted.

EXT

The  EXT field is unused but  must be available.

Memory  Control  Block  Definition

* * * **

mcb_base
mcb_length
mcb_ext

mcb  len

equ
equ
equ

equ

word  ptr  0
word  ptr  mcb_base + word
byte ptr  mcb_length + word

mcb_ext + byte

Listing  6-1.  Memory Control  Block  Definition

START

I -4-

MIN
—4-

I -4—

MAX
—4—

— 4
* OOOOH
4-

* OOOOH

Figure  6-8.  MPB - Memory  Parameter  Block

6-136

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

L  WRITEBLK

Field

START

MIN

MAX

Table 6-14.  MPB Field  Definitions

Description

if  non-OOH,  an  absolute  request  at  this  paragraph

minimum  memory  needed (paragraphs)

maximum  memory wanted (paragraphs)

*  OOOOH

these fields must  be  OOH;  they are  used internally.

Memory  Parameter  Block  Definition

mpb_start
mpb_min
mpb_max
mpb_pdadr
mpb_flags

mpb_len

equ
equ
equ
equ
equ

equ

word  ptr  0
word  ptr  mpb_start + word
word  ptr  mpb_min + word
word  ptr  mpb_max + word
word  ptr  mpb_pdadr -I- word

mpb_flags + word

;  mpb_flags  definition

mf_load
mf_share
mf  code

equ
equ
equ

OOOOlh
OOOOlh
00004h

Listing  6-2.  Memory Parameter  Block  Definition

DIGITAL RESEARCH ™

6-137

M  ALLOC

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

M  ALLOC

Allocate  A Memory Segment

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

080H or  081H  (128,129)
MPB  Address-Offset
MPB Address-Segment
MPB  filled  in

0  on success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code
MPB  start filled in

The M_ALLOC system  call  allows  a program  to  allocate  extra  memory. A success-
ful  allocation  allocates  a  contiguous  memory  segment  whose  length  is  at  least  the
MIN  and  no  more  than  the  MAX  number  of  paragraphs  specified in  the  MPB.  The
START  field  of  the  MPB  is  modified  to  be  the  starting  paragraph  of  the  memory
segment.  The  MIN  and  MAX  fields  are  modified  to  be  the  length  of  the  memory
segment  in  paragraphs.  Memory  Segments  can  be  explicitly  released  through  the
M_FREE  system  call;  Concurrent  CP/M-86  also  releases  all  memory  owned  by  a
process at  termination.

Note:  MIN  and  MAX  fields  must  be  explicitly filled in.  The  MAX  value must  be
greater  than  or  equal to  the MIN value.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned in  CX.

6-138

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

M  FREE

M  FREE

Free  A Memory  Segment

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

082H  (130)
MFPB Address  -  Offset
MFPB Address - Segment

0  on success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

START

*  OOOOH

Figure  6-9.  MFPB - M_FREE Parameter Block

The  M_FREE  system  call  releases  memory  starting at  the  START  paragraph  to  the
end  of  a  single  previously  allocated  segment  that  contains  the  START  paragraph. If
the  START  paragraph  is  the  same  as  that  returned  in  the  MPB  of  a  memory  alloca-
tion  call,  then  M_FREE  releases  the  whole  memory  segment.  The  *  OOOOH  field
must  be initialized  to  zero.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-139

MC  ABSALLOC

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

MC  ABSALLOC

Allocate  A Memory  Segment
At  A  Specified  Address

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:
CX:

038H  (56)
MCB  Address  -  Offset
MCB  Address  - Segment

0  on  success
OFFH on  failure
Same  as AL
Error  Code

The  MC_ABSALLOC  system call  allocates  a memory  area  that  starts  at the  address
specified  by  the  BASE  field.  The  memory  area's  length  is  specified  by  the  LENGTH
field  of the  MCB. Upon return, register  AL contains a OOH if the  request was  successful,
and  a  OFFH  if the  memory  could  not  be  allocated.  If the  calling process  already  owns
the requested memory, no error is returned. This  assures  compatibility with  CP/M-86.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-140

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

MC  ABSMAX

MC  ABSMAX

Allocate  Maximum  Memory  Available
At  A  Specified  Address

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned Values:
Register  AL:

BL:
CX:

036H  (54)
MCB  Address  -  Offset
MCB  Address - Segment
MCB_base filled in,  MCB_length  set to
max  number of  paragraphs  wanted

0  on  success
OFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AL 
Error  Code
MCB_length  set to  actual number
of  paragraphs  allocated

.1

. 

In  CP/M-86,  system  call  036H  does  not  allocate  memory,  but  under  Concurrent
CP/M-86,  this  system  call  allocates  memory,  because  other  processes  are  competing
for  common  memory.  For  compatibility  with  CP/M-86,  MC_ABSALLOC  (system
call  56)  does  not  return  an  error  if  there  is  a  memory  segment  allocated  at  the
absolute  address.

MC_ABSMAX  is  used  to  allocate  the  largest  possible  region  at  the  absolute  para-
graph  boundary  given  by  the  BASE  field  of  the  MCB,  for  a  maximum  of  LENGTH
paragraphs.  If  the  allocation  is  successful, the  system  call  sets  the  LENGTH  to  the
actual  length.  Upon  return,  register  AL has  the  value OFFH if no  memory  is available
at  the  absolute  address,  and  OOH if the  request  was  successful.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-141

MC  ALLFREE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

MC  ALLFREE

Free  All Memory  Owned
By The  Calling Process

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  03AH: (58)

In  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  environment,  the  MC_ALLFREE system call  releases
all  of  the  calling process's  memory  except  the  User  Data  Area  (UDA).  This  system
call  is  useful  for  system  processes  and  for  subprocesses  that  share  the  memory  of
another  process.

Note: 
into the  Transient  Program  Areas  (TPAs).

this  system  call  should  not  be  used  by  processes  running programs  loaded

6-142

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

MC  ALLOC

MC  ALLOC

Allocate  A Memory  Segment

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:
CX:

037H  (55)
MCB  Address  -  Offset
MCB  Address  - Segment
MCBJength filled in

0  on  success
OFFH  on  failure
Same  as AL
Error  Code
MCB  base filled in

The  MC_ALLOC  system  call  allocates  a  memory  area  whose  size  is the  LENGTH
field of  the  MCB.  MC_ALLOC  returns  the  base  paragraph  address  of  the  allocated
region  in  the  user's  MCB.  Upon  return,  register  AL  contains  a  OOH if  the  request
was  successful,  and  a  OFFH  if  the  memory  could  not  be  allocated. 

i

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-143

MC  FREE

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

MC  FREE

Free  A  Specified  Memory  Segment

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:
CX:

039H  (57)
MCB  Address  -  Offset
MCB  Address - Segment
MCB_base,  MCB_ext  filled  in

0  if successful
OFFH  on  failure
Same  as AL
Error  Code

The  MC_FREE  system  call  is  used  to  release  memory  areas  allocated  to  the  pro-
gram.  The  value  of  the  EXT  field  of  the  MCB  controls  the  operation  of  this  system
call.  If EXT  =  OFFH, then  the  system  call releases all memory  areas  allocated  by  the
calling  program.  If  the  EXT  field  is  OOH, the  system  call  releases  the  memory  area
beginning  at  the  specified  BASE and  ending  at  the  end  of  the  previously  allocated
memory  segment.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-144

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

MC  MAX

MC  MAX

Allocate  Maximum  Memory  Available

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

035H (53)
MCB  Address  -  Offset
MCB  Address  - Segment

(MCB_length  contains maximum
number  of  paragraphs  wanted)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:

BL:
CX:

0  on success
OFFH  on  failure
Same  as AL
Error  Code 

»

(MCB_base filled in, MCBJength
set to  actual  number of  paragraphs
allocated)

In  CP/M-86,  system  call  035H  does  not  allocate  memory,  but  under  Concurrent
CP/M-86,  this system call  allocates memory because other  processes  are competing for
common  memory. For compatibility with CP/M-86,  MC_ABSALLOC (system call 56)
does  not  return an error if there is a memory segment allocated at the absolute address.

MC_MAX  allocates  the  largest  available memory  region  that  is less than  or  equal
to  the  LENGTH  field  of  the  MCB  in  paragraphs.  If  the  allocation  is  successful,  the
system  call  sets  the  BASE  to  the  base  paragraph  address  of  the  available  area  and
LENGTH  to  the  paragraph  length.  Upon  return,  register  AL  has  the  value  OFFH if
no  memory  is  available,  and  OOH if  the  request  was  successful.  The  system  call  sets
the  EXT  to  1  if  there  is  additional  memory  for  allocation,  and  0  if  no  additional
memory  is available.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-145

P  ABORT

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

6.2.7  Process/Program  System Calls

P  ABORT

Terminate  A  Process
By  Name  Or  PD  Address

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

09DH (157)
APB Address  -  Offset
APB Address  - Segment
APB  filled  in

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as AX
Error  Code

oo

06

—4-
PD
—I--

I TERM

CMS

*OOH

NAME

Figure 6-10.  APB - Abort  Parameter  Block

6-146

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  ABORT

Field

PD

TERM

*OOH

CNS

Table  6-15.  APB Field Definitions

Definition

Process Descriptor  offset  of the process to  be terminated. If this field
is zero, a match  is attempted with the NAME and  CNS fields to find
the  process.  If this field is nonzero,  the  NAME  and  CNS  fields  are
ignored.

Termination  Code.  This field corresponds  to  the  termination code
of the  P_TERM  system call. If the low-order byte of TERM  is OFFH,
P_ABORT  can  abort  a  specified  system process;  if the termination
code  is not  OFFH, the  system call can only terminate a user process.
(A system process  is identified  by the  SYS flag in the  Process Descrip-
tor's  FLAG field.)

This  field  is reserved  for  future  use  and  must  be  set to  zero.

Default  console  of  process  to  be  aborted.  If  the  PD  field  is  0,  the
P_ABORT  system call scans the Thread  List for a PD with the same
NAME  and  CNS  fields  as  specified  in  the  APB. P_ABORT  only
aborts  the first process  that  it finds. Subsequent calls must  be  made
to  abort  all processes  with  the  same  NAME  and  CNS.

NAME

Name  of  the  process  to  be  aborted.  Combined  with  the  CNS field,
the  NAME  field  is used  to  find  the  process  to  be  aborted.  This  is
only  used  if the  PD field is  0.

The  P_ABORT  system  call  permits  a  process  to  terminate  another  specified  process.
The  calling  process  passes  the  address  of  a  data  structure  called  an  Abort  Parameter
Block,  initialized  as described  above.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-147

P_ABORT 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

If  the  Process  Descriptor  address  is  known,  it  can  be  filled  in,  and  the  process
name  and  console  can  be  omitted.  Otherwise,  the  Process  Descriptor  address field
should  be  a  OOH and  the  process  name and  console must be  specified.  In either case,
the  calling  process  must  supply  the  termination  code,  which  is the  same  parameter
passed  to  the  P_TERM  system call.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a list of error  codes  returned in  CX.

6-148

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P  CHAIN

P  CHAIN

Load, Initialize And Jump
To  Specified  Program

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DMA  Buffer:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

02FH  (47)
Command  Line

OFFFFH  - Could  not  find

Command

The  P_CHAIN  system  call  provides  a  means  of  chaining  from  one  program  to  the
next  without  operator  intervention.  Although  there  is  no  passed  parameter  for  this
call,  the  calling  process  must  place  a  command  line  terminated  by  a  0  byte  in  the
default  DMA  buffer.

i

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  P_CHAIN  system call  releases  the  memory  of  the
calling  process  before  executing  the  command.  The  command  is  processed  in  the
same  manner  as  the  P_CLI  system  call.  If  the  command  warrants  the  loading  of  a
CMD  file  and  the  memory  released  is large enough  for  the  new  program,  Concurrent
CP/M-86  loads  the  new  program  into  the  same  memory  area  as  the  old  program.
The  new  program  is run  by the  same process  that  ran  the  old  program.  The  name of
the  process  is changed  to  reflect  the  new  program  being run.

Parameter  passing  between  the  old  and  new programs  is accomplished  through  the
use  of  disk  files,  queues,  or  the  command  line.  The  command  line  is  parsed  and
placed  in  the  Base  Page  of  the  new  program  in the  manner documented  in the  P_CLI
system  call.

The  P_CHAIN  system  call  returns  an  error  if no  CMD  file  is found.  If a  CMD  file
is  found,  and  an  error  occurs  after  it  is  successfully  opened,  the  calling  process
terminates,  as  its  memory  has  been  released.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-149

P  CLI

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P_CLI

Interpret  And  Execute  Command  Line

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  096H  (150)

DX:  CLBUF Address -  Offset
DS:  CLBUF Address  -  Segment

Returned  Values:

Register  AX:  0 on  success

OFFFFH  on  error

CX:  Error  Code

0

1

23

128 

129

. 

*OOH 

i 

i 

COMMAND 
-t- 
+ 

'
\
/

' 
\ 
/ - 

"^n

*OOH

I 

4-

Figure  6-11.  CLI Command  Line  Buffer

Table 6-16.  Command  Line Buffer  Field Definitions

Field

*OOH

Definition

Must  be set to  zero  for  internal  use.

COMMAND

1-128  ASCII characters  terminated  with  a  null  character.

6-150

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

P_CLI

The  P_CLI  system call obtains  an  ASCII command  from  the  Command  Line  Buffer
(CLBUF)  and  then  executes  it.  If the  calling process  is attached  to  its  default  virtual
console, the  P_CLI  system  call  assigns the  virtual console  to  either  the  newly  created
process,  or  to  the  Resident  System  Process  (RSP) that  acts  on  the  command.  The
calling process  must  reattach  to  its default virtual  console  before accessing  it.

P_CLI  calls  F_PARSE to  parse  the  command  line. If an  error  occurs  in F_PARSE,
P_CLI  returns  to  the  calling  process  with  the  error  code  set  to  the  same  code  that
F_PARSE  returned.

If  there  is  no  disk  specification  for  the  command,  P_CLI  tries  to  open  a  system
queue  with  the  same  name  as  the  command.  If the  open  operation  is successful,  and
the  queue  is  an  RSP-type  queue,  P_CLI  then  writes  the  command  tail  to  the  RSP
queue.  If the  queue is full,  the  system call returns an  error  code  to  the  calling  process.
The  P_CLI  function  also  attempts  to  assign  the  calling process's  virtual  console  to  a
process  with  the  same  name  as  the  RSP queue.  If  the  RSP queue  cannot  be  found,
the  CLI  assumes  the  command  is on  disk  and  continues.

The  P_CLI  system  call  opens  a file with  the filename being the  command  and  the
filetype being  CMD. If the  command  has  an  explicit disk specification, and  the  F_OPEN
system  call  fails,  P_CLI  returns  an  error  code  to  the  calling process.  If  there  is  no
disk  specification with  the  command,  P_CLI  attempts  to  open  the  command file on
the  system  disk.  If the  F_OPEN  system  call  succeeds,  P_CLI  checks  the file to  verify
the  SYSTEM  attribute  is  on.  This  search  order  is  discussed  in  Section  2.9.1  of  the
Concurrent  CP/M-86  User's  Guide.  If this  second  F_OPEN  fails  or  if the  DIR  attrib-
ute  is on,  P_CLI  returns an  error  code  to  the  calling process.

Once  the  P_CLI  system  call  succeeds  in  opening  the  command  file,  it  calls  the
P_LOAD  system  call.  The  P_LOAD  system call finds, and  then  loads  the file into  an
appropriate  memory  space.  If P_LOAD  encounters  any errors,  the  P_CLI system call
returns  to  the  calling process  with  the  error  code  set by the  Load  system  call.

A  successful  load  operation  establishes  the  command file in  memory  with  its Base
Page partially  initialized. The  P_CLI  system call then  continues parsing the  command
tail  to  set up  the  Base Page values from  05Oh  to OFFH.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-151

P_CLI 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P_CLI  initializes an  unused Process  Descriptor  from  the  internal PD table, a  UDA,
and  a  96-byte  stack  area.  The  UDA and  stack  are  dynamically allocated  from  mem-
ory.  P_CLI  then  calls  the  P_CREATE  system  call.  If  P_CLI  encounters  an  error  in
any  of  these  steps,  it  releases  all  memory  segments allocated  for  the  new  command,
as  well  as  the  Process  Descriptor,  and  then  returns  with  the  appropriate  error  code
set.

Once  the  P_CREATE  system  call  returns  successfully, the  P_CLI  system  call  assigns

the  calling process's  default virtual console  to  the new process  and  then  returns.

The  calling process  should  set its priority to  less than  the TMP  (198) if it wants  to
attach  to  the  virtual  console  after  the  created  process  releases  it.  Once  the  calling
process  has  successfully reattached,  it  should  set its priority  back to  200.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-152

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  CREATE

P  CREATE

Create  A Process

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

090H  (144)
PD  Address -  Offset
PD  Address - Segment
PD  filled  in

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  P_CREATE  system call allows a process  to  create a subprocess within its  own
memory  area.  The  child  process  shares  all  memory  owned  by  the  calling  process  at
the  time  of  the  P_CREATE  call.  If  the  Process  Descriptor  (PD)  is  outside  of  the
operating  system  area,  the  system  copies  it  into  a  PD  from  the  internal  PD  Table.
The  system  call returns  an  error  code  if there  are  no  more  unused PDs in  the  table.

The  User  Data  Area  (UDA) can  be anywhere in memory but  is required to  be on  a
paragraph  boundary.  The  only  time  the  system  copies  the  PD  is  if  it  is  not  within
64k  of  the  System Data  Segment.

Process  Descriptors,  as well  as Queue  Descriptors  and  Queue  Buffers,  are  required
to  be  within  the  System  Data  Segment  because  they  are  linked  together  on  various
system  lists  or  are  used  by more  than  one  process.  Because of this,  they cannot  be in
the  Transient  Process  Area  (TPA), where  they cannot  be  protected.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-153

P  CREATE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

More  than  one  process  can  be  created  by  a  single  P_CREATE  call  if  the  LINK
field  of  the  PD  is nonzero.  In  this case,  it  is assumed to  point  to  another  PD within
the  same  Data  Segment.  After  it  creates  the  first  process,  the  system call  checks  the
Process  Descriptor's  LINK  field.  Using  this  linked  list  of  PDs,  a  single P_CREATE
call  can  create  multiple processes.

Note: 
the  P_CREATE system  call does  not  check  the  validity of the  PD  addresses
passed  by  the  calling process.  An invalid PD address can  cause  Concurrent CP/M-86
to  crash  if no  hardware  memory  protection  is available on  the  system.

Figure 6-12.  PD - Process  Descriptor

6-154

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P  CREATE

Field

LINK

THREAD

STAT

Table  6-17.  PD Field  Definitions

Definition

Link field for insertion on current system list. If this field's initial
value  is  nonzero,  it  is  assumed  to  point  to  another  PD.  This
field is used to create more than one process with a single Create
Process  call.

Link  field  for  insertion  on  Thread  List.  Initialized  to  be  zero
(0).

Current Process activity. Initialized to be zero (0). Activity codes
are listed  below:

00 RUN

The process  is ready to  run. The STAT field
is always in this state when a process is exam-
ining its own  Process  Descriptor. The  PD is
on  the  Ready  List.  The  currently running
process  is always at  the  head of  Ready List.

01 POLL

The process  is polling a device. The  PD is on
the  Poll  List.

02 DELAY

The process is delaying for a specified number
of  system ticks. The  PD is on  the  Delay List.

06  Read  Queue  The process is waiting to read a message from
a  system queue that  is empty. The  PD  is  on
the  Read  Queue  List  whose  root  is  in  the
Queue  Descriptor  of 
the  system  queue
involved.

07 Write Queue  The process is waiting to write a message to
a  system queue whose  buffer  is full.  The  PD
is on  the Write Queue  List, whose  root is in
the  Queue  Descriptor  of  the  system queue
involved.

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-155

P  CREATE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Field

Table  6-17. 

(continued)

Definition

08  FLAGWAIT

The  process  is waiting  for  a  system  flag  to
be  set.  The  PD  is  in  the  flag  table entry of
the flag it is waiting  for.

09  CIOWAIT

The process  is waiting to attach to a character
I/O  device  (console  or  list)  while  another
process  owns  it. The  PD is on  CQUEUE  list
whose root is in the Character Control  Block
of  the  device in  question.

Current priority. Process scheduling is done based on this field.
Typical  user  programs  run  at  a  priority  of  200.  0  is the  best
priority,  and  255  is the  worst  priority.  The  following is a list
of priority  assignments used by most Concurrent CP/M-86 sys-
tems.  User processes  priorities should be from  200-254.

PRIOR

Initialization Process
Interrupt  Handlers

1 
2 - 31 
32  - 63  System  Processes
64-189  Undefined
191  -  197  Undefined 

- 

i
198  Terminal  Message  Process
199  Undefined
200  Default  Priority  For Transients

201  - 254  User  Processes

255 

Idle  Process

FLAG

Bit field of flags determining  run-time characteristics  of a process.
Initialize as needed. All undocumented flags are used internally
or  are  reserved  for  future use.

001H  SYS

System Process. Has privileged access to var-
ious  features of  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  This
process  can  only  be  terminated  if  the  ter-
mination  code  is  OFFH.  This  process  can
access  restricted  system  queues.  This  flag  is
turned  off  if the  calling process is not  a sys-
tem process.

6-156

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  CREATE

Field

Table 6-17. 

(continued)

Definition

002H KEEP

This process  cannot  be terminated. This  flag
is  turned  off  if  the  calling  process  is  not  a
system  process.

004H KERNEL

This process resides within the operating sys-
tem.  This  flag  is turned  off  if the  PD  is  not
within  the  operating  system.

010H  TABLE

This  PD  is copied  into  the  PD  from  the  PD
table. When  this process  terminates, the PD
is recycled  into  the  PD table.

Process  Name.  Eight bytes, all eight bits of each  byte are  used
for  matching process  names.

Segment  address  of  this  processes  User  Data  Area. Initialized
to be the number of paragraphs from the beginning of the calling
processes'  Data  Segment. The User Data  Area contains  process
information  that  is not  needed  between  processes.  It  also  con-
tains  the  System  Stack  of  each  process.  Refer  to  the  UDA
description  below.

Current  default  disk

Current  default  user number

Root  of  linked  list  of  Memory  Segment  Descriptors  that  are
owned by this  process. Initialized  to  zero,  except for  reentrant
or  shared  code  RSPs.

Process  that  created  this  process.  The  P_CREATE  system call
sets this value at process  creation. The parent field is set to  zero
if  the  parent  terminates  before the  child.

NAME

UDA

DISK

USER

MEM

PARENT

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-157

P  CREATE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Field

CNS

LIST

Table  6-17. 

(continued)

Definition

Current  default  console's number.  Initialized  to  be the  default
console  number.

Current  default  list  device's.  Initialized  to  be  the  default  list
device  number.

RESERVED

Reserved  for  internal  use.  These  fields  must  be  initialized  to
zero  (0).

6-158

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  CREATE

OOH

08H

10H

18H

20H

28H

30H

38H

40H

48H

50H

58H

60H

68H

F8H

RESERVED

DMA  OFFSET
4

RESERVED

RESERVED

•4-

•4-

AX

Dl

•4-

••»-•

•4-

CS

•4-

•4-

•+•

•4-

RESERVED
•4-
RESERVED

•4-
BX
— 4-
SI

RESERVED

4-

INTO

RESERVED

INT  4

I DS

INT 224
•4-

— 4-
CX

— 4
BP
— 4-
SP

—4-

— 4-

ES
-+•

—4-

•4-

RESERVED

U S ER  S Y S T EM  S T A CK

Figure 6-13.  UDA  - User Data Area

•4-
DX
—4-

RESERVED
4
RESERVED
4-

INT 1
4-
INT 3
— 4-
RESERVED

I

INT 225

• + •

-»-

SS
—-»-•

—4-

•4-

6FH

FFH

The  length  of  the  UDA is 256  bytes,  and  it  must begin on  a paragraph  boundary.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-159

P_CREATE 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Field 

DMA  OFFS 

AX,BX,CX,DX,
DI,SI,BP 

SP 

Table 6-18.  UDA  Field Definition

Definition

The  initial  DMA  offset  for  the  new  process.  The  segment
address  of the DMA  is assumed to be the same as the initial
Data  Segment  (refer  to  DS below).

The  initial  register  values  for  the  new  process.  These  are
typically  set to  zero.

The  initial  stack  pointer  for  the  new  process.  The  stack
pointer  is relative to  the  initial Stack  Segment  (refer  to SS
below).  The  initial  stack  of  the  new  process  must  be  ini-
tialized with the offset  of the first instruction to be executed
by the new process. The word  that  the stack  pointer  points
to is the initial instruction pointer.  Two words  must follow
the initial IP, which is filled in with the initial Code Segment
(refer  to  CS  below)  and  the  initial  flags.  The  initial  flags
are set to  0200H, which means that  interrupts are on, and
all  other  flags  are  off.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  starts  a  new
process  by  executing  an  Interrupt  Return  instruction  with
the  initial stack.

Note: 
Stack  at  the  end  of  the UDA.

this  stack  area  is  distinct  from  the  User  System

•*

Low  Memory

•

stack  area

SS  SP 

IP

0 

0 

(CS)

(Flags)

Stack  Initialization  Area

6-160

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P  CREATE

Field

INT 0, INT 1,
INT 3, INT 4

CS, DS,
ES,SS

INT 224,
INT 225

Table  6-18. 

(continued)

Definition

The initial interrupt vectors for the first five interrupt  types
can  be  set  by filling in  these fields. The  first  word  of  each
field is the  Instruction  Pointer  (IP), and  the  second  word  is
the  Code  Segment  (CS) for  a  list  of  the  interrupt  routine
that  services these interrupts. Those fields that  are zero are
initialized  to  be the  same as the calling processes  interrupt
vectors.  These fields are typically initialized to  be 0.

The initial segment addresses for the new process  are taken
from  these fields. Those fields that  are  zero  are initialized
to  be the  same  as the  calling process's Data  Segment.

Interrupts 224 and 225 are used to communicate with  Con-
current  CP/M-86  by typical programs.  These interrupt  vec-
tors  are  initialized  to  be the  same  as the  calling process if
these  values  are  zero.  The  ability  to  change  these  values
allows  a  run-time system  to  intercept  Concurrent  CP/M-
86  calls  that  its  children make.  The  suggested  protocol  is
to keep INT 225 pointing to the Concurrent CP/M-86  entry
point  and changing INT 224 to point to an internal routine.
When  a child process  does an INT 224,  the internal routine
can filter calls to  Concurrent  CP/M-86  using INT  225  for
the  actual  Concurrent  CP/M-86  call.

RESERVED

These fields are  used  internally and  must  be  initialized  to
zero.

USER SYSTEM
STACK

This  is the  stack  area  used  by the  process  when  it  is in  the
operating  system. The  SP variable in the  UDA should  not
point  to  this  area.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-161

P  DELAY

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

P  DELAY

Delay  For  Specified
Number  Of  System Ticks

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:

08DH  (141)
Number  of  System Ticks

The  P_DELAY  system  call  causes  the  calling  process  to  wait  until  the  specified
number  of  system  ticks  has  occurred.  The  P_DELAY system call avoids the necessity
of  programmed  delay  loops.  It  allows  other  processes  to  use the  CPU resource  while
the  calling  process  waits.

The  length  of  the  system  tick  varies  among  installations.  A  typical  system  tick  is
60Hz  (16.67  milliseconds). In  Europe,  it  is  likely  to  be  50Hz  (20  milliseconds). The
exact  length  of  the  system  tick  can  be obtained  by reading  the  TICKSPERSEC value
from  the  System Data  Segment  (refer  to  the  S_SYSDAT system call).

There  is up  to  one  tick  of  uncertainty  in the  exact  amount  of  time delayed. This  is
due  to  the  P_DELAY  system  call  being  called  asynchronously  from  the  actual  time
base.  The  P_DELAY  system  call  is  guaranteed  to  delay  the  calling process  at  least
the  number  of  ticks  specified. However,  when  the  calling process  is  rescheduled  to
run,  it  might  wait  quite  a  bit  longer  if there  are  higher  priority  processes  waiting  to
run.  The  P_DELAY  system  call  is  used  primarily  by  programs  that  need  to  wait
specific  amounts of  time  for  I/O  events  to  occur.  Under  these  conditions, the  calling
process  usually  has  a  very  high  priority  level. If  a  process  with  a  high  priority  calls
the  P_DELAY  system  call,  the  actual  delay  is  typically within  a  system  tick  of  the
amount  of time  wanted.

6-162

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P  DISPATCH

P  DISPATCH

Call  Dispatcher

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  08EH  (142)

The  P_DISPATCH  system  call  forces  a  reschedule of processes  that  are  waiting  to
run.  Normally,  dispatches  occur  at  every  system  tick  interrupt  (usually  60  times  a
second),  and  whenever  a  process  releases  a  system  resource.  Dispatching  also  occurs
whenever  a  process  needs  a  system  resource  that  is  not  currently available. A CPU-
bound  process  runs  for  no  more  than  one  system  tick  before  a  dispatch  is  forced.
The  dispatch  occurs  at  the  next  system  tick.

i

The  Concurrent  CP/M-86  Dispatcher  is priority  driven, with  round-robin  schedul-
ing  of  equivalent-priority  processes.  When  a  process  calls  the  P_DISPATCH  system
call, it  is rescheduled,  so that processes with  higher  or  equivalent  priorities  are  given
the  CPU  before  the  calling process  obtains  it  again.  The  calling process  regains  con-
trol  of  the  CPU resource  when  it  becomes  the  highest priority  process  again.

• 

,r

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-163

P  LOAD

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  LOAD

Load  A  CMD  Type  File  Into  Memory

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

03BH  (59)
FCB  Address -  Offset
FCB Address - Segment

Base Page Segment
OFFFFH  on  error
Same  as AX
Error  Code

The  P_LOAD  system  call  loads  a  disk  CMD  type file into  memory.  Upon  entry,
register  DX  contains  the  offset,  relative to  DS,  of  a  successfully  opened  FCB  that
specifies  the  CMD  file  to  load.  Upon  return, register AX has  the  value  OFFFFH  if the
program  load  failed.  Otherwise,  AX  contains the  paragraph  address  of the  Base Page
belonging  to  the  loaded  program.  The  paragraph  address  and  length  of  each  group
loaded  from  the  CMD  file,  is found in  the  Base Page. See Sections  3.2  and  3.3.

Note  that  before  calling  P_LOAD,  the  calling  process  must  establish  the  DMA
address  of  where  the  CMD  file  is to  be  loaded.  This  is accomplished  with  F_DMA-
SEG and FJ3MAOFF.

Note:  open  the  CMD file in Read-Only mode  and  close it once the load  is completed.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a list  of error  codes  returned  in CX.

6-164

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

P  PDADR

P  PDADR

Return  The  Address  Of  The
Calling  Process's  Process  Descriptor

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

09CH  (156)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:
BX:
ES:

PD  Address  -  Offset
Same  as  AX
PD  Address  - Segment

The  P_PDADR  system  call  obtains  the  address  of  the  calling  process's  Process
Descriptor.  For  a  description  of  the  format  of  the  Process  Descriptor,  refer  to  the
P_CREATE  system  call.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-165

P  PRIORITY

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  PRIORITY

Set The  Priority Of
The  Calling Process

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DL:

091H  (145)
Priority

The  P_PRIORITY  system  call  sets  the  priority  of  the  calling  process  to  the  speci-
fied  value.  This  system  call  is  useful  in  situations  where  a  process  needs  to  have  a
high  priority  during  an  initialization  phase,  but  afterwards can run  at  a lower priority.

The  best  or  highest  priority  is  OOH,  while  the  worst  or  lowest  priority  is OFFH.
Transient  processes  are  initialized to  run  at  C8H  (200  decimal) by the  P_CLI system
call.

6-166

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  RPL

P_RPL

Resident  Procedure  Library

Entry  Parameters
Register  CL
DX
DS

.'! 

: 
:  097H  (151)
:  CPB Address  -  Offset
:  CPB Address  - Segment

f<

Returned  Values
Register  AX

:  01H  if RPL not  found
RPL return  parameter
: 
same  as AX
:  Error  Code
:  RPL return  segment  if  addr

BX
CX
ES

N A ME
1 
i 

l 

i 

r 

' 

',

PARAM 

1

Figure  6-14.  CPB - Call Parameter  Block

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-167

P_RPL 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Field 

NAME 

Table  6-19.  CPB Field Definitions

Definition

Name  of  Resident Procedure, eight ASCII characters

PARAM 

Parameter  to  send  to  the  Resident Procedure

P_RPL  permits  a  process  to  call  a  system  call  in  an  optional  Resident Procedure

Library  (RPL).

P_RPL opens  a  system  queue with  the  specified  name. If the  Q _OPEN  system call
succeeds,  P_RPL  checks  the  queue to  verify  that  it  is an  RPL-type  queue. If either the
Q_OPEN  fails,  or  if  it  is  not  an  RPL-type  queue,  P_RPL  returns  to  the  calling
process with  an error  code.

P_RPL  reads  a  message  from  the  queue  that  contains  the  address  of  the  specified
system  call.  It  then  places  the  PARAM  field  of  the  CPB in  register  DX,  and  places
the  calling process's Data  Segment address in register DS. P_RPL performs a Far Call
instruction  to  the  address  it  obtains  from  the  queue  message.  Upon  return  from  the
RPL, the  system  call copies  the  BX register to  the AX register and  then  returns to  the
calling  process. 

«

Note: 
the  P_RPL  system  call  does  not  write  the  address  of  the  Resident  Procedure
back  to  the  queue.  The  Resident  Procedure  itself  must do  this.  If the  Resident Proce-
dure  is to  be  reentrant,  it  must  write  the  message  into  the  queue  upon  entry.  If it is
to  be  serially reusable, the  procedure  must  write  the  message just  before returning.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-168

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  TERM

P  TERM

Terminate  Calling  Process

Entry  Parameters:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  on success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as AX
Error  Code

The  P_TERM  system  call terminates  the  calling process.  If the  termination  code  is
not  OFFH,  the  system  call  can  only  terminate  a  user process.  If the  termination  code
is  OFFH, the  system  call  can  terminate  the  calling process  even though  the  process's
System flag is on.  P_TERM  cannot  terminate  a process  with  the  KEEP flag on.  If the
termination  is successful, the  system call releases the  mutual exclusion  queues  owned
by  the  process.  It  also  releases  all  memory  segments  owned  by  the  process,  and
returns  the  Process  Descriptor  to  the  PD table.

A  process  can  own  one  or  more  of  the  following  resources:  memory  segments,
consoles,  printers,  mutual  exclusion  messages,  and  system Lock  List entries  that  rec-
ord  open  files  and  locked  records.  When  a process  terminates  and  releases its  resources,
these  resources  become  available to  other  processes  on  the  system.  For  example,  if a
terminating  process  releases  a  system  console,  the  console  is  usually  given  back  to
the  console's TMP.  This  occurs  when  the TMP  is the  highest priority  process waiting
for  the  console.

P_TERM  does  not  return  any  results  to  the  calling  process.  If  the  system  call
returns  to  the  calling  process,  the  P_TERM  call  has  failed  for  one  of  two  reasons.
Either  the  process  has  the  KEEP  flag  on,  or  it  has  the  SYSTEM  flag  on,  and  the
termination  code  is not  OFFH.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-169

P  TERMCPM

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

P  TERMCPM

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OOH  (0)

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  on success
OFFFFH on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  P_TERMCPM  system  call  terminates  the  calling process,  releasing all system

resources  owned  by the process.

P_TERMCPM  is implemented  internally by calling P_TERM  with  the  termination

code  set to OOH.

Under  CP/M-86, the  P_TERMCPM  system call has  a  further  argument that  allows
a  process  not  to  release  its  memory.  This  argument  places  a  piece  of  code  into
memory  that  becomes  an  interface for  later programs.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  does  not
include  this  option.  Memory  segments  are  not  recovered  by  the  system  until  all
processes  that  own  the  memory  segment  have released it.

Refer  to Table 6-5 for  a list of returned error codes.

6-170

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

P  TERMCPM

6.2.8  Queue  System Calls

Queue  system  calls under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  use the  Queue  Parameter Block data
structure  to  pass  parameters  to  and  from  the  operating system. Listing  6-3 shows  the
structure  of  the  Queue  Parameter  Block and  the  equates  for  its fields.

*  OOOOH

QUEUEID
H

NAME

* O O O OH 

BUFFBUFFER

Figure  6-15.  QPB - Queue  Parameter  Block

Table  6-20.  QPB Field Definitions

Field

Description

QUEUEID

Queue  number field; filled in by a Q _OPEN  operation

*  OOOOH

Reserved  for  internal  use;  must  be initialized to  zero

BUFFER

NAME

Offset  address  of  Queue  Message  Buffer

Name  of  Queue  for  Q _OPEN  operation

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-171

P_TERMCPM 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

. *

;* 
. *
. *

j* 
. *

QPB  - Queue  Parameter  Block Definition

00  OOOOH  queueid  OOOOH 

buffer

;*  08 
. *

name

;* 
;* 
;* 
. *
>

queueid  -  Queue  ID,  address  of  QD
buffer  - address  to  read/write into/from
name  - name  of  queue  (for open  only)

qpb_0 
qpb_queueid 
qpb_buffer 
qpb_name 

qpb_len 
qnamsiz 

equ 
equ 
equ 
equ 

equ 
equ 

word  ptr  0
word  ptr  qpb_0 + word
word  ptr  qpb_queueid + 4
byte ptr  qpb_buffer  + word

qpb_name + qnamsiz
8

Listing 6-3.  Queue Parameter  Block  Definition

6-172

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q_CREAD

Q_CREAD

Conditionally  Read  A  Message
From  A System  Queue

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  08AH  (138)

DX:  QPB Address -  Offset
DS:  QPB Address  - Segment

QPB _queueid filled in by previous  Q _OPEN
QPB _buffer  set to  message  buffer  offset

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

0 on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX 

'

KX:
CX:  Error  Code  message  in  buffer

The  Q _CREAD  system  call  is  analogous  to  the  Q _READ  system  call,  but  it
returns  an  error  code if there  are  not  enough  messages to  read, instead  of waiting  for
another  process  to  write to  the queue.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of error  codes  returned in  CX.

'.-<  •

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-173

Q_CWRITE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Q _CWRITE

Conditionally  Write  A  Message
To  A System  Queue

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

;

08CH  (140) 
QPB  Address  -  Offset
QPB Address  - Segment
QPB _queueid  filled  in by previous  Q _OPEN
QPB_buffer  set  to  message buffer  offset
message  in  current  DMA  buffer

Returned  Values:

Register  AX:  0 on  success

OFFFFH  on  failure

BX:  Same as  AX
CX:  Error  Code

The  Q _CWRITE  system  call  is  analogous  to  the  Q _WRITE  system  call,  but  it
returns  an  error  code  if  there  is  not  enough  system  queue  buffer  space  for  the  mes-
sage  to  be written,  instead  of  waiting  for  another  process  to  read  from  the  queue.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of error  codes returned  in  CX.

6-174

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q_DELETE

Q _DELETE

Delete A System Queue

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  088H (136)

DX:  QPB  Address -  Offset
DS:  QPB  Address - Segment

QPB _queueid filled in  by a
previous  Q _OPEN  call

Returned  Values:

Register  AX:  0 on  success

OFFFFH  on  failure

BX:  Same as AX
CX:  Error  Code

The  Q _DELETE  system  call removes a system queue from  the  system. The system
returns  error  codes  if  the  queue  cannot  be  deleted  or  if  the  queue  has  not  been
opened  prior  to  the  Q _DELETE  call.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of error  codes  returned in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-175

Q_MAKE

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Q _MAKE

Make  A System  Queue

Entry  Parameters:

Register  CL:  086H  (134)

DX:  QD  Address  -  Offset
DS:  QD  Address  - Segment

QD  filled  in

Returned  Values:

Register  AX:  0 on  success

OFFFFH  on  failure

BX:  Same  as  AX
CX:  Error  Code

'  OOOOH

NMSGS

'  OOOOH

'  OOOOH 

N A ME 

FLAGS 

N/

MVIE

MS

'  (

5 G L EN
-  T  — —^~
DOOOH

*  OOOOH 

'  OOOOH 

B U F F ER

Figure  6-16.  QD  - Queue Descriptor

6-176

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q_MAKE

Table  6-21.  Queue  Descriptor  Field Definitions

Field

FLAGS

Queue  Flags. The  bits  are  defined  as follows

Definition

0001H  - Mutual  exclusion  queue
0002H  - Cannot  be  deleted
0004H  -  Restricted  to  system processes
0008H  - RSP message queue
001 OH  -  Used  internally 
0020H  -  RPL  address  queue
0040H  - Used  internally
0080H  - Used  internally

Remaining  flags  reserved  for  future  use

I

NAME

8-byte queue name. All 8 bits of each character are matched  on a
Q_OPEN call.

MSGLEN

Number  of  bytes  in  each  logical  message

NMSGS

BUFFER

Maximum  number  of  logical  messages  to  be  supported.  If  the
number  of  messages  written  to  the  queue  equals this  maximum,
no  more  messages  are  allowed  until a  message is read. 

'

Address  of  the  queue  buffer.  This  buffer  mur t  be  (NMSGS  *
MSGLEN)  bytes  long.  The  address  is an  offset  relative to  the DS
register. This field is unused if the QD resides outside of the System
Data Segment.  Typically this field is 0 if the queue is being created
by  a  transient  program.  RSPs that  create  queues  must  initialize
this field to point to a buffer. The Data  Segment of an RSP's queue
is considered  part of the  System Data  Segment  unless it is beyond
64k  of  the  beginning  of  the  System  Data  Segment.

OOOOH

For  internal  use.  Must  be initialized to  zero.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-177

Q_MAKE 

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Every system queue under Concurrent  CP/M-86  is associated  with a Queue  Descriptor
that  resides  within  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86 System Data  Segment.  In the  Q_MAKE
system  call,  the  calling  process  passes  the  address  of  a  Queue  Descriptor.  If  this
Queue  Descriptor  is within  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  System Data  Segment, the sys-
tem  uses  it  directly  for  the  System  Queue.  If the  Queue  Descriptor  is outside  of  the
System  Data  Segment,  the  system obtains  a Queue  Descriptor  from  an internal Queue
Descriptor  table.  If there  are  no  unused  Queue  Descriptors  in  the  internal table,  the
system  call returns  an  error  code.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

The  buffer  for  a  system  queue  must  also  reside  within  the  System  Data  area.  For
non-OOH  length  buffers,  resident  buffers  are  used  directly.  The  system  obtains  a
buffer  from  the  Queue  Buffer  Area  if  the  buffer  does  not  reside  within  the  System
Data  Segment.  The  size  of  the  buffer  is  calculated from  the  NMSGS  and  MSGLEN
fields.  The  system call returns an  error  code  if there  is not  enough  unused buffer  area
left  to  accommodate  this  new  buffer.

All  system  queues  must  have  unique  names.  The  system  call  returns  an  error  code

if  a  system  queue  already exists  by  the  given name.

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  all  system queues must  be  explicitly  opened  (refer  to
the  Q _OPEN  system  call)  before  being used  to  read  or  write  messages or  to  delete
the queue.

6-178

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q_OPEN

Q _OPEN

Open  A System  Queue

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

087H  (135)
QPB  Address  -  Offset
QPB Address  - Segment
QPB _name filled in

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code
QPB _queueid filled in

All  system  queues  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  must  be  explicitly  opened  before  a
read,  write,  or  delete  operation  can  be  done.  The  Q _OPEN  system  call  examines
each  existing  system  queue  and  attempts  to  match  the  name  in  the  QPB  with  the
name  of  a  system  queue.  All  eight  bytes  of  the  name  must  match  for  a  successful
open.  All  bits  of  each  byte  are  examined.  If  the  open  operation  is  successful,  the
Q _OPEN  system  call  modifies the  Queue  ID Field  of  the  QPB.  Once  the  the  Queue
is opened,  subsequent  reads,  writes,  or  a  delete  are  allowed.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-179

Q_READ

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q _READ

Read  A Message  From  A System Queue

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:  QPB Address  - Segment

089H  (137)
QPB  Address  -  Offset

QPB _queueid filled in by previous Q  _OPEN
QPB _buffer  set  to  message  buffer  offset

Returned  Values:

Register  AX:  0 on  success

OFFFFH  on  failure

BX:  Same as AX
CX:  Error  Code  message  in  buffer

The  Q _READ  system  call  reads  a  message  from  a  system  queue  that  was  previ-
ously  opened  by  the  calling  process.  The  system  call  returns  an  error  code  if  the
queue  was  not  previously  opened  or  if  the  system  queue  has  been  deleted  since  the
Q _OPEN  call.  If there  are  not  enough  messages  to  read  from  the  queue,  the  calling
process  waits  until another  process  writes  into  the  queue before  returning.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list of  error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-180

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

Q_WRITE

Q _WRITE

Write  A Message  To  A System  Queue

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

" 

* -

08BH  (139) 
QPB Address  -  Offset
QPB Address  - Segment
QPB_queueid filled in by previous  Q  _OPEN
QPB_buffer  set  to  message  buffer  offset
message  in  buffer

Returned  Values:
Register  AX:

BX:
CX:

0  on  success
OFFFFH  on  failure
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  Q _WRITE  system  call  writes  a  message  to  a  system  queue  that  was  previ-
ously  opened  by  the  calling  process.  The  system  call  returns  an  error  code  if  the
queue  was  not  previously  opened  or  if  the  system  queue  has  been  deleted  since  the
Q _OPEN  call.  If  there  is  not  enough  buffer  space  in  the  queue,  the  calling  process
waits  until  another  process  reads  from  the  queue  before  writing  to  the  queue  and
returning.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-181

S  BDOSVER

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

6.2.9 

System  Information  System  Calls

S  BDOSVER

Return  BDOS Version  Number

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OCH  (12)

Returned  Values:
Register  AL:
AH:
BX:

31  (BDOS Version  3.1)
14  (Concurrent  CP/M-86)
Same  as  AX

The  S_BDOSVER  system  call returns  the  BDOS file system version number, allow-

ing version-independent  programming.

AL  High  Nibble  = BDOS Version  Number

AL  Low  Nibble  = BDOS Revision Level

AH  High  Nibble  = CPU Type

0  = 8080
1  = 8086

AH  Low  Nibble  = OS Type

0 =  CP/M
1 =  MP/M
4 = Concurrent  CP/M
5,7 to  E = Reserved

2 = CP/M w/networking
3 = MP/M  w/networking
6 = Concurrent  CP/M

w/networkmg

Figure  6-17.  BDOS Version  Number  Format

6-182

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

S  BIOS

S  BIOS

Call  BIOS Character Routine

Entry Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

032H (50)
BIOS Desc. Addr. -  Offset
BIOS Desc.  Addr.  - Segment

Returned Values:
Register  AX:
BX:

BIOS Return
Same  as  AX

FUNG

CX

DX
-  -f  -

Figure  6-18.  BIOS  Descriptor Format

The  S_BIOS  system  call  is provided  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86  for compatibility
with  programs  generated  under  CP/M-86  that  use  this  system  call  (Function  50).
Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  only  routines  that  interface  with  character  devices are
supported.  The  arguments to  character  routines  such  as  CONIN  and  LIST must be
converted  to  those  appropriate  for  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  XIOS.  Refer  to  the
Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for  further information  about  the  XIOS.

Note:  calls  to  the  XIOS  Console  Status,  Input,  and  Output  system  calls  do  not  go
to  the  XIOS  if the  referenced device is a  virtual console.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-183

S  OSVER

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

S  OSVER

Return  The  Version  Of Current
Concurrent  CP/M-86 System

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

OA3H  (163)

Returned  Values:
AX:
BX:
CX:

Version  Number  (01410H)
Same  as  AX
Error  Code

The  S_OSVER  system  call  provides  information  that  allows version-independent
programming.  The  system  call  returns  a  two-byte  value, with  AH  set  to  014H  for
Concurrent  CP/M-86,  and  AL set to  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  version level. The  AH
register  contains  a  value  set  to  the  type  of  operating  system.  A  value  of  01420H
indicates  Concurrent CP/M-86  2.0.

Refer  to  Table  6-5  for  a  list  of error  codes  returned  in  CX.

6-184

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide 

S_OSVER

AL  High  Nibble  = Concurrent  CP/M-86  Version  Number

AL  Low  Nibble  =  Concurrent  CP/M  Revision  Level

AH  High  Nibble  = CPU  Type

0  = 8080
1  = 8086

AH  Low  Nibble  = OS  Type

0  = CP/M 
1  -  MP/M 
4  = Concurrent  CP/M 
5  7 to  E = Reserved 

2  = CP/M  w/networkmg
3 = MP/M  w/networkmg
6 = Concurrent  CP/M

w/networkmg

Figure  6-19.  Operating  Systems  Version  Number  Format

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-185

S  SERIAL

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

S  SERIAL

Return  Current  System's
Serial  Number

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:

06BH  (107)
SERIAL  Address  -  Offset
SERIAL  Address  - Segment

SERIAL  filled  in

.3

Figure  6-20.  SERIAL Number  Format

S_SERIAL  returns  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  serial  number to  the  addressed,  six-

byte  SERIAL field as a  six-byte ASCII numeral.

6-186

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

S  SYSDAT

S  SYSDAT

Return  Address  Of  The
System  Data  Segment

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:

09AH  (154)

Returned  Values:
AX:
KX:
ES:

Sysdat  Address  -  Offset
Same  as  AX
Sysdat  Address  -  Segment

The  S_SYSDAT  system call returns the address of the System Data  Segment of the cal-
ling  process.  The  System  Data  Segment  contains  all  Process  Descriptors,  Queue
Descriptors, 
the  roots  of  system  lists,  and  other  internal  data  that  Concurrent
CP/M-86 uses.

Figure  6-21, illustrates the  SYSDAT Table  and  its  fields.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-187

S  SYSDAT

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

OOH

08H

10H

18H

20H

28H

30H

38H

SUP ENTRY
1 

U -^— — —

RESERVED

I 

i 

i 

i 

• 

i 

. 

i 

i 

i 

RESERVED
i 

RESERVED
i 

RESERVED
. 

RESERVED

XIOS ENTRY

i 

1 

1 

DISPATCHER

RESERVED

i

i

i

i

i 

i 

i 

XIOS  INIT
i 

ii

PDISP

i 

i 

i 

i

l

40H

CCPMSEG

RSPSEG

ENDSEG

48H

NLCB  NCCB

N_

SYS_

FLAGS

DISK

50H

58H

60H

68H

TEMP  TICKS
/SEC

DISK 

MDUL

i

RLR

LUL

MFL
•

.

DLR

QMAU

70H

RESERVED

THRDRT

MMP

i

CCB

.

PUL
l

i.

DRL
i

QLR

RESER
-VED

NVCNS

RESER
-VED

DAY
FILE

FLAGS

QUL
i

PLR

I

MAL

78H

80H

VERSION

VERNUM

CCPMVERNUM

TOD_DAY

TOD 
_HR 

TOD
_MIN

TOD
_SEC

NCON
DEV

NLST
DEV

NCIO
DEV

LCB

i

88H

OPEN_FILE

LOCK_
MAX

OPEN_
MAX

Figure 6-21.  SYSDAT Table

6-188

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

S  SYSDAT

Field

SUP ENTRY

XIOS ENTRY

XIOS  INIT

DISPATCHER

PDISP

Table  6-22.  SYSDAT  Table  Data Fields

Explanation

Double-word  address  of  the  Supervisor  entry  point  for
intermodule  communication.  All internal  system  calls go
through  this  entry  point.

Double-word  address  of  the  Extended  I/O  System entry
point  for intermodule communication.  All XIOS  function
calls  go through  this  entry point.

Double-word  address  of the  Extended  I/O  System Initial-
ization  entry  point.  System hardware  initialization  takes
place  by a  call  through  this  entry  point.

Double-word  address  of  the  Dispatcher  entry  point  that
handles  interrupt  returns.  Executing  a  Far  Jump  to  this
address  is  equivalent  to  executing  an  Interrupt  Return
instruction.  The  Dispatcher  routine  causes  a  dispatch  to
occur  and  then  executes an  Interrupt Return. All registers
are  preserved  and  one  level of stack is used. This  location
should  be  used  as  an  exit  point  by  all  XIOS  interrupt
handlers  that  use the  DEV_SETFLAG  system  call.

Double-word  address  of  the  Dispatcher  entry  point  that
causes  a  dispatch  to  occur  with  all  registers  preserved.
Once the dispatch is done,  a RETF instruction is executed.
Executing  a JMPF PDISP is equivalent  to executing  a RETF
instruction.  This location  should  be used  as an  exit  point
whenever the XIOS releases a resource that might be wanted
by  a  waiting  process.

CCPMSEG

Starting  paragraph  of  the  operating  system  area.  This  is
also  the  Code  Segment  of the  Supervisor  Module.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-189

S  SYSDAT

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Field

RSPSEG

ENDSEG

NVCNS

NLCB

NCCB

NFLAGS

SYSDISK

MMP

DAY  FILE

Table  6-22. 

(continued)

Explanation

Paragraph  Address of the  first  RSP in a linked list of RSP
Data Segments. The first word  of the data  segment  points
to  the  next  RSP  in  the  list.  Once  the  system  has  been
initialized,  this field is  zero.

First  paragraph  beyond  the  end  of  the  operating system
area,  including any  buffers  consisting of uninitialized RAM
allocated  to  the  operating  system by GENCCPM.  These
include  the  Directory  Hashing,  Disk  Data  and  XIOS
ALLOC buffers.  These  buffer  areas, however, are not  part
of  the  CCPM.SYS file.

Number of virtual consoles,  copied  from the XIOS  Header
by  GENCCPM.

Number  of  List  Control  Blocks,  copied  from  the  XIOS
Header  by  GENCCPM.

Number  of  Character  Control  Blocks,  copied  from  the
XIOS  Header  by  GENCCPM.

Number  of  system  flags  as  specified  during  GENCCPM.

Default  system diskette.  The  CLI looks  on  this diskette if
it  cannot  open  the  command  file  on  the  user's  current
default  diskette.  Set during  GENCCPM.

Maximum  memory  allowed  per  process.  Set  during
GENCCPM.

Day  File option. If this field is OFFH, the operating system
displays  file  logging  information  on  system  consoles  at
each  command.  Set during  GENCCPM.

6-190

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

S  SYSDAT

Field

TEMP DISK

Table 6-22. 

(continued)

Explanation

Default  temporary  diskette.  Programs  that  create  tem-
porary files should use this diskette. Set during  GENCCPM.

TICKS/SEC

The  number  of  system  ticks  per  second.

LUL

CCB

FLAGS

MDUL

MFL

PUL

QUL

Link  list root  of  unused  Lock  list  items.

Address  of  the  Character  Control  Block  Table,  copied
from  the  XIOS  Header  by  GENCCPM.

Address  of the  Flag Table.

Link  list  root of  unused  Memory  Descriptors.

< 

t 

,

Link  list root  of  free  memory  partitions.

Link  list  root  of  unused Process  Descriptors.

Link  list root  of  unused  Queue  Descriptors.

QMAU

Queue  Buffer  Memory  Allocation Unit.

RLR

DLR

DRL

PLR

Ready List Root. Linked list of PDs that  are ready to  run.

Delay  List Root.  Link list of  PDs  that  are  delaying for  a
specified  number  of  system  ticks.

Dispatcher  Ready List. Temporary  holding place for PDs
that  have  just  been  made  ready to  run.

Poll  List  Root.  Linked  list  of  PDs  that  are  polling  on
devices.

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

6-191

S  SYSDAT

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Field

THRDRT

QLR

MAL

VERSION

VERNUM

Table  6-22. 

(continued)

Explanation

Thread  List  Root.  Linked  list  of  all  current  PDs  on  the
system. The  list  is threaded  though  the  THREAD field of
the  PD  instead  of  the  LINK field.

x

Queue  List Root. Linked list  of  all  System  QDs.

Link  list  of  active  memory  allocation  units.  A  MAU  is
created  from  one  or  more  memory  partitions.

Address,  relative to  CCPMSEG, of version  string.

Concurrent  CP/M-86  version  number  (system  call  12,
SJBDOSVER).

CCPMVERNUM

Concurrent  CP/M-86  version  number  (system  call  163,
S_OSVER).

TOD_DAY

TOD_HR

TOD_MIN

TOD_SEC

NCONDEV

NLSTDEV

NCIODEV

Time-of-Day.  Number  of days  since  1 Jan,  1978.

Time-of-Day.  Hour  of the  day.

Time-of-Day.  Minute  of the  hour.

Time-of-Day.  Second  of  the  minute.

Number  of XIOS consoles,  copied  from  the XIOS  Header
by  GENCCPM.

Number  of XIOS list devices, copied  from  the XIOS  Header
by  GENCCPM.

Total  number  of  character  devices 
+ NLSTDEV).

(NCONDEV

6-192

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

S  SYSDAT

Field

LCB

OPEN  FILE

LOCK  MAX

OPEN  MAX

Table  6-22. 

(continued)

Explanation

Offset  of  the  List  Control  Block Table,  copied  from  the
XIOS  Header  by  GENCCPM.

Open  File Drive Vector. Designates drives that have open
files on them. Each bit of the word value represents a disk
drive;  the  least  significant  bit  represents Drive A, and  so
on  through  the  most  significant  bit,  Drive P. Bits which
are  set indicate drives containing open files.

Maximum number of locked records per process. Set dur-
ing  GENCCPM.

Maximum  number of open disk files per process.  Set dur-
ing  GENCCPM.

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

6-193

T  GET

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

T  GET

Get  System Time  And  Date

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:
AL:

069H (105)
TOD  Address  -  Offset
TOD  Address  - Segment

Seconds
TOD filled in
(Days,  Hours  and  Minutes  only)

DAY
— 4 -

HOUR  MIN 

SEC

Figure  6-22.  TOD  - Time-of-Day  Structure

6-194

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

T_GET

Field 

DAY 

HOUR 

MIN 

SEC 

Table  6-23.  Time-of-Day  Field Definitions

Definition

The  number  of  days  since  1 January  1978.  The  day  is stored  as a
16-bit  integer.

The  current  hour  of  the  current  day.  The  hour  is represented  as a
24  hour  clock  in  2  binary coded  decimal (BCD) digits.

The  current minute of  the  current  hour.  The  minute is stored  as  2
BCD  digits.

The  current  second  of  the  current  minute. The  second  is stored  as
2  BCD digits.

The  T_GET  system  call  obtains  the  system  internal  time  and  date.  The  calling
process  passes  the  address  of  a  four-byte  data  structure  that  receives the  time  and
date  values.  This  system  call  is  equivalent to  the  T_SECONDS  system  call,  except
that  it does  not  return  the  SECONDS field of  the  internal time.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-195

T  SECONDS

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

T  SECONDS

Get  Current  System Time  And  Day

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

Returned  Values:

09BH  (155)
TOD  Address -  Offset
TOD  Address  - Segment

TOD  filled  in
(Days,  Hours,  Minutes,  and  Seconds)

The  T_SECONDS  system call  returns  the current encoded  time and  date (including

seconds)  in  the  TOD  structure passed  by the  calling process.

6-196

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

Concurrent CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

T  SET

T  SET

Set System Time  And  Date

Entry  Parameters:
Register  CL:
DX:
DS:

068H  (104)
TOD  Address -  Offset
TOD  Address - Segment

The  T_SET  system  call  sets  the  system  internal time and  date.  The  calling process

passes  the  address  of  a 4-byte  structure  containing the  time  and  date  specification.

The  date  is represented  as a  16-bit  integer with  day  1 corresponding  to January  1,
1978.  The  time  is  represented  as  two  bytes  hours  and  minutes stored  as  two  BCD
digits.

Under  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  this system call  also sets the second field of the  system

time  and  date  to OOH.

End  of  Section  6

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

6-197

o

Appendix  A
Glossary

Base Page:  Memory  region  between  OOOOH  and  0100H relative to  the  beginning of
the  Data  Segment  used  to  hold  system parameters.  Base Page  serves  primarily as  an
interface  region  between  user  programs.  Note  that  in  the  8080  Model,  the  code  and
data  are  intermixed  in the code  segment.

BCD:  Acronym  for  Binary Coded  Decimal.  Representation  of  decimal numbers using
binary  digits.  See Table  B-2 for  binary representations  of  ASCII codes.

BDOS:  Basic Disk  Operating  System  (BDOS).  The  BDOS manages the  Concurrent
CP/M-86  file  structure  and  executes  most  of  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86  system calls.

block:  Basic  unit  of  disk  space  allocation  under  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  Each  disk
drive  has  a  fixed  block  size  (BLS) defined  in  its  disk  Parameter Block in  the  XIOS.
The  block  size  can  be  IK,  2K,  4K,  8K,  or  16K  of  consecutive  bytes.  Blocks  are
numbered  relative to  zero  on  a  disk.  Blocks are not  shared  between files.

boolean:  Variable  that  can  have  only  two  values;  usually  interpreted  as  true/false
or  on/off.

Checksum  Vector  (CSV):  Contiguous  data  area  in the XIOS  with  one byte for  each
directory  sector  to  be  checked,  that  is,  CKS bytes.  A  Checksum Vector  is initialized
and  maintained  for  each  logged-in  drive.  Each  directory  access by  the  system results
in  a  checksum  calculation  that  is  compared  with  that  in  the  Checksum  Vector.  If
there  is  a  discrepancy,  the  drive  is  set  to  Read-Only  status.  This  prevents  the  user
from  inadvertently  switching  disks  without  logging  in  the  new  disk with  a  CTRL-C.
If  not  logged  in,  the  new  disk  is treated  the  same as the old  one,  and  you  can  destroy
data  on  it  if you  write  to  it.

CIO:  Character  I/O  (CIO) Module.  The  CIO  module  handles  all  character  I/O  to
and  from  consoles  and  list devices.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

A-l

A  Glossary 

Concurrent CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

CLI:  Command  Line  Interpreter.  The  P_CLI  system  call  interprets  the  command
requested  in  a command  line and  performs the  system calls needed  to  open  a process,
load  the  command  file,  and  execute  the  code.

CMD:  Filetype  for  Concurrent  CP/M-86  command  files.  These  are  machine lan-
guage  object  modules  ready  to  be  loaded  and  executed.  Any file with  this  type  can
be  executed  by  simply  typing  the  filename  after  the  drive prompt.  For  example,  the
program  PIP.CMD  can  be  executed  by  simply typing PIP.

i

command:  Set  of  instructions  that  are  executed  when  the  command  name  is  typed
after  the  system  prompt. These  instructions  can  be  built in  the  Concurrent  CP/M-86
system  or  can  reside  on  disk  as  a file of  type  CMD.  Concurrent  CP/M-86  commands
consist  of  three  parts:  the  command  name,  the  command  tail,  and  a  carriage return.

console:  Primary  I/O  device  used  by  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The  console  usually
consists of  a  CRT  screen  for  displaying output  and  a  keyboard  for  input.

control character:  Nonprinting  ASCII character  produced  on the console  by holding
down  the  CTRL  (CONTROL)  key while  striking the  character  key. CTRL-H  means
hold  down  CTRL  and  press  H.  Control  characters  are sometimes  indicated  using the
up-arrow  symbol  ("),  so  CTRL-H  can  be represented  as  "  H.  Certain  control charac-
ters are treated  as special commands  by Concurrent  CP/M-86.

Default  Buffer:  128-byte  buffer  maintained  at  0080H  in  the  Base  Page.  When  the
CLI  loads  a  CMD  file,  it  initializes  this  buffer  to  the  command  tail,  that  is,  any
characters  typed  after  the  CMD  file  name.  The  first  byte  at  0080H  contains  the
length  of  the  command  tail  while  the  command  tail  itself  begins  at  0081H. A binary
zero  terminates the  command  tail  value. The  I command  under  DDT™  initializes  this
buffer  in  the  same way  as the  CLI. 

' 

""^

Default  FCB:  One  of two  FCBs maintained  at 005CH and  006CH in the Base Page.
The  P_CLI  system  call  initializes the  first  default FCB from  the  first  delimited field in
the  command  tail  and  initializes  the  second  default  FCB from  the  next  field  in  the
command  tail.

A-2

ifl  DIGITAL RESEARCH

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide 

A  Glossary

delimiters:  ASCII  characters used to  separate constituent parts  of a file specification.
The  P_CLI  system  call  recognizes  certain  delimiter  characters  as  :  .  =  ;  <>  _  '
blank,  and  carriage  return.  Several  Concurrent  CP/M-86  commands  also  treat  ,  []
()  ,  and  $  as  delimiter  characters.  It  is advisable to  avoid  the  use of  delimiter charac-
ters  and  lower-case  characters  in filenames.

directory:  Portion  of  a  disk  containing entries for  each file on  the  disk and  locations
of  the  blocks  allocated  to  the  files.  Each  file  directory  entry  is  in  the  form  of  a  32-
byte  FCB,  although  one  file  can  have  several  entries,  depending  on  its  size.  The
maximum  number  of  directory  entries  supported  is  specified  in  the  drive's  Disk
Parameter  Block.

directory  entry:  32-byte  entry  associated  with  each  disk  file.  A file can  have  more
than  one  directory  entry  associated  with  it.  There  are  four  directory  entries  per
directory  sector.  Directory  entries  can  also  be referred  to  as directory  FCBs.

disk,  diskette:  Magnetic  media  used  for  mass  storage  of  data  in  the  computer  sys-
tem.  The  term  disk  can  refer  to  a  diskette,  a  removable  cartridge  disk,  or  a  fixed
hard  disk.

Disk  Parameter  Block  (DPB):  Table  residing in the  XIOS that  defines  the  character-
istics  of  a  drive  in  the  disk  subsystem  used  with  Concurrent  CP/M-86.  The  address
of  the  DPB is in the  Disk  Parameter  Header  at  DPbase  +  OAH. Drives with  the  same
characteristics  can  use the  same  DPB.  However,  each  logical drive must  have  its  own
Disk  Parameter  Header  and  DPB.  The  address  of  the  drive's  Disk  Parameter  Header
must  be  returned  in  registers  HL  when  the  BDOS  calls  the  SELDSK entry  point  in
the  XIOS.  DRV_DPB  returns  the  DPB address.

Disk  Parameter  Header  (DPH):  16-byte  area  in  the  XIOS  containing  information
about  the  disk  drive  and  a  scratchpad  area  for  certain  BDOS  operations.  See  the
Concurrent  CP/M-86  System  Guide  for  further  details.

DIGITAL RESEARCH

A-3

A  Glossary 

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

extent  (EX):  16K  consecutive  bytes  in  a file.  Extents  are  numbered  from  0  to  31.
One  extent  can  contain  1, 2,  4,  8,  or  16  blocks.  EX is the  extent  number field of a
FCB and  is a  one-byte  field  at  FCB  -1-12, where  FCB labels the first byte in the  FCB.
Depending  on  the  Block  Size  (BLS) and  the  maximum  data  Block Number  (DSM), a
directory  entry  contains  1, 2,  4,  8,  or  16 extents.  The  EX field is  usually  set to  0 by
the  user,  but  contains  the  current  extent  number  during file I/O.  The  term  "Extent
Folding"  describes  directory  entries  containing  more  than  one  extent.  In  CP/M  ver-
sion  1.4,  each  FCB contained  only one  extent.

FCB:  See File  Control  Block.

file:  Collection  of  data  containing  from  zero  to  242,144  records.  Each  record  con-
tains  128  bytes  and  can  contain  either  binary  or  ASCII data.  Files consist  of  one  or
more  16K extents,  with  128  records  per  extent.

File  Control  Block  (FCB):  Thirty-six  consecutive  bytes maintained and  updated  by
system  calls  for file I/O.  The  FCB fields are  described  in Section  2.4.

hex file format:  Absolute  output  of  ASM86  for  the  Intel  8086.  A HEX file contains
a  sequence  of  absolute  records,  which  give  a  load  address  and  byte  values  to  be
stored  starting  at  the  load  address  (refer  to  Section  4.3).

I/O:  Acronym  for  Input/Output  operations  or  routines  handling the  input  and  out-
put  of  data  in  the  computer  system.

logical  drive:  Logically  distinct  region  of  a  physical drive.  A  physical drive  can  be
divided  into  one  or  more  logical drives, and  designated  with  specific  drive  references
(such  as  d:a  or  d:f). Thus,  at  the  user  interface, it  appears that  there  are  several disks
in  the  system.

MEM:  Memory  Module.  The  Memory  Module  handles  all  memory  management
calls  by  methods  transparent  to  your  applications  program.

parse:  Separate  a  command  line  into  its syntactic parts.

queue:  Data  structure  used  by  the  file  system  to  keep  track  system  information,
such  as  processes  ready  to  run,  locked files, and  resources  currently in  use by  processes.
Processes  also  use  queues  to  communicate  with  one  another.  The  BDOS  system  calls
create  and  maintain queues.

A-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide 

A  Glossary

Read-Only:  Condition  in which  a  logical  disk  drive  can  be read  but  not  written  to.
A  drive  can  be  set  to  Read-Only  status  by  using  the  SET utility.  This  protects  the
user  from  switching  disks  without  executing  a  disk  reset.  Files  can  also  be  set  to
Read-Only  status  with  the  SET  utility  or  the  F_ATTRIB  system  call.  Read-Only  is
often  abbreviated  as R/O.

record:  Smallest  unit  of  data  in  a  disk  file  that  can  be  read  or  written.  A  record
consists  of  128  consecutive  bytes  whose  byte  displacement  in  a file is the  product  of
the  Record  Number  times  128.  A  128-byte  record  in  a  file  occupies  one  128-byte
sector  on  the  diskette.  If  the  blocking  and  deblocking  algorithm  is  used,  several
records  can  occupy  each  disk  sector.

reentrant  code:  Code  that  can  be  used  by  one  process  while  another  is  already
executing  it.  Reentrant  code  must  not  be  self-modifying;  it  must  be  pure  code  that
does  not  contain  data.  The  data  for  reentrant  code  can  be  kept  in  a  separate  data
area  or  placed  on  the stack.

RSP:  Reserved  System  Process.  An  RSP  is  a  Concurrent  CP/M-86  utility  included
within  Concurrent  CP/M-86  during the  execution  of  GENCCPM.

RTM:  Real  Time  Monitor. The  RTM  is the  nucleus of  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  man-
aging  queues  and  flags,  polling  devices,  and  dispatching  and  suspending  processes.
Application  programs  gain  access  to  RTM  functions  through  system calls.

sector:  Unit  of data  read  from  and  written  to  the  disk  by the  XIOS. The  sector  size
is  dependent  on  the  disk  drive hardware  and  is usually  a  power  of two,  such  as  256,
512,  1024,  or  2048  bytes.  These  disk  sectors  are  referred  to  as Host  Sectors.

source  file:  ASCII  text  file  usually  created  with  a  text  editor  that  is an  input file to
a  program,  such  as  a  compiler,  assembler, or  a  text  formatter.

stack:  Reserved  area  of  memory  where the  processor  saves the  return  address  when
it  receives a  Call  instruction.  When  the  processor  encounters  a  Return  instruction,  it
restores  the  current  address  on  the  stack  to  the  Instruction  Pointer.  Data  such  as  the
contents  of  the  registers  can  also  be  saved  on  the  stack  on  a  first-in-last-out  basis.
The  Push  instruction  places  data  on  the  stack  and  the  Pop  instruction  removes  it.
8086  stacks  are  16  bits  wide;  instructions  operating  on  the  stack  add  and  remove
stack  items  one  word  at  a  time.  An  item  is  pushed  onto  the  stack  by  decrementing
the  stack  pointer  (SP) by  2  and  writing  the  item  at  the  SP address.  In  other  words,
the  stack  grows  downward  in  memory.

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

A-5

A  Glossary 

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's Guide

SUP:  The  Supervisor  (SUP) manages  communications  between  processes  and  the
operating  system  kernel,  and  between  other  operating  system  modules.  All  system
calls  are  intercepted  by the  SUP.

track:  Concentric  ring  on  the  disk;  the  standard  IBM.,  single density disks have  77
tracks.  Each  track  consists  of  a  fixed  number of  numbered sectors.  Tracks  are  num-
bered  from  0  to  one  less  than  the  number  of  tracks  on  the  disk.  Data  on  the  disl.
media  is accessed  by combinations  of  track  and  sector  numbers.

TMP:  Terminal  Message  Processes.  The  TMPs  are  Resident System Processes  that
intercept  command  lines  from  the  virtual  consoles,  check  for  errors,  and  pass  on
executable  requests  to  the  CLI.  The  TMP  prints  the  prompt  and  some  system  error
messages  on  your  console.  Each  virtual  console  has  an  independent  TMP  heading
defining  the  console's  environment,  including the  default  disk,  user  number,  printer, 
and  console.

"^

transient command  file:  File of type  .CMD  stored  on  disk. Such files must be  loaded
into  the  system  each  time  they  are  executed,  and  therefore execute  more  slowly than
Resident  System  Processes  (RSPs),  which  are  an  integral part  of  the  operating  system
and  execute  rapidly.  Transient  commands  are  created  with  the  GENCMD  utility;
RSPs  are  included  in the  operating  system during execution  of  GENCCPM.

user:  Logically  distinct  subdivision  of  the  directory.  Each  directory  can  be  divided
into  16 user  numbers.

wildcard:  A  ? or  *  character.  The  BDOS  directory  search  call  matches  ? with  any
single character  and  * with  multiple characters. Refer  to  the F_SFIRST and  F_SNEXT
system calls for  further  details.

XIOS:  Extended  I/O  System.  In  Concurrent  CP/M-86,  the  BDOS  is  the  invariant
file-handling  system,  which  operates  independent  of  the  hardware  implementation.
The  XIOS  is  the  customizable  I/O  interface configured for  your  hardware  system by
the  system  manufacturer.  The  XIOS  is  similar  to  the  BIOS in  CP/M  and  CP/M-86,
but  it has  been  extended  to  implement  virtual consoles  and  associated  features.

End  of  Appendix  A

A-6

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Appendix  B
ASCII  and Hexadecimal  Conversions

This  appendix  contains  tables  of  the  ASCII symbols,  including their  binary,  deci-

mal,  and  hexadecimal  conversions.

Symbol

Meaning

Symbol

Meaning

Table  B-l.  ASCII Symbols

ACK
BEL
BS
CAN
CR
DC
DEL
DLE
EM
ENQ
EOT
ESC
ETB
ETX
FF

acknowledge
bell
backspace
cancel
carriage  return
device  control
delete
data  link  escape
end  of  medium
enquiry
end  of  transmission
escape
end  of  transmission
end  of  text
form  feed

FS
GS
HT
LF
NAK
NUL
RS
SI
SO
SOH
SP
STX
SUB
SYN
US
VT

file separator
group  separator
horizontal  tabulation
line  feed
negative  acknowledge
null
record  separator
shift  in
shift  out
start  of heading

! 

'  space

start  of  text
substitute
synchronous idle
unit  separator
vertical  tabulation

DIGITAL RESEARCH1

B-l

B  ASCII  Conversions

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

Binary

0000000
0000001
0000010
0000011
0000100
0000101
0000110
0000111
0001000
0001001
0001010
0001011
0001100
0001101
0001110
0001111
0010000
0010001
0010010
0010011
0010100
0010101
0010110
0010111
0011000
0011001
0011010
0011011
0011100
0011101
0011110
0011111
0100000

Table  B-2.  ASCII  Conversion Table

Decimal

Hexadecimal

ASCII

000
001
002
003
004
005
006
007
008
009
010
Oil
012
013
014
015
016
017
018
019
020
021
022
023
024
025
026
027
028
029
030
031
032

00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
OA
OB
OC
OD
OE
OF
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1A
IB
1C
ID
IE
IF
20

NUL
SOH  (CTRL-A)
STX  (CTRL-B)
ETX  (CTRL-C)
EOT  (CTRL-D)
ENQ  (CTRL-E)
ACK  (CTRL-F)
BEL  (CTRL-G)
(CTRL-H)
BS 
(CTRL-I)
HT 
LF 
(CTRL-J)
VT  (CTRL-K)
FF 
(CTRL-L)
CR  (CTRL-M)
SO 
(CTRL-N)
(CTRL-O)
SI 
DLE  (CTRL-P)
DC1  (CTRL-Q)
DC2  (CTRL-R)
DC3  (CTRL-S)
DC4  (CTRL-T)
NAK  (CTRL-U)
SYN  (CTRL-V)
ETB  (CTRL-W)
CAN  (CTRL-X)
EM 
(CTRL-Y)
SUB  (CTRL-Z)
ESC  (CTRL-D
(CTRL-)
FS 
GS 
(CTRL-])
RS  (CTRL-1
US  (CTRL- )
(SPACE)

B-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH'"

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

B  ASCII  Conversions

Binary

Decimal

Hexadecimal

ASC/7

Table B-2. 

(continued)

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
2A
2B
2C
2D
2E
2F
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
3A
3B
3C
3D
3E
3F
40
41

!
w
#
$
%
&

1
(
)
*
+
,

-
*
/
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
:
;
<
=
>
p

@
A

0100001
0100010
0100011
0100100
0100101
0100110
0100111
0101000
0101001
0101010
0101011
0101100
0101101
0101110
0101111
0110000
0110001
0110010
0110011
0110100
0110101
0110110
0110111
0111000
0111001
0111010
0111011
0111100
0111101
0111110
0111111
1000000
1000001

033
034
035
036
037
038
039
040
041
042
043
044
045
046
047
048
049
050
051
052
053
054
055
056
057
058
059
060
061
062
063
064
065

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

B ASCII  Conversions

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Binary

Decimal

Hexadecimal

ASCII

Table  B-2. 

(continued)

1000010
1000011
1000100
1000101
1000110
1000111
1001000
1001001
1001010
1001011
1001100
1001101
1001110
1001111
1010000
1010001
1010010
1010011
1010100
1010101
1010110
1010111
1011000
1011001
1011010
1011011
1011100
1011101
1011110
1011111
1100000
1100001
1100010
1100011
1100100
1100101

066
067
068
069
070
071
072
073
074
075
076
077
078
079
080
081
082
083
084
085
086
087
088
089
090
091
092
093
094
095
096
097
098
099
100
101

42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
4A
4B
4C
4D
4£
4F
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
5A
5B
5C
5D
5E
5F
60
61
62
63
64
65

B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N 
0
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
w
X
Y
z
[
\ 
]

<

1

a
b
c
d
e

' •

r

,.; 

•  <

B-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

B  ASCII  Conversions

Binary

Decimal

Hexadecimal 

ASCII

Table  B-2. 

(continued)

1100110
1100111
1101000
1101001
1101010
1101011
1101100
1101101
1101110
1101111
1110000
1110001
1110010
1110011
1110100
1110101
1110110
1110111
1111000
1111001
1111010
1111011
1111100
1111101
1111110
1111111

102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127

66 
67 
68 
69 
6A 
6B 
6C 
6D 
6E 
6F 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
7A 
7B 
7C
7D 
7E
7F 

f
g
h
i
j
k
1
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
{

}

DEL

End  of  Appendix  B

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

B-5

C)

C)

Appendix C
Error  Codes

Table C-l.  Concurrent CP/M-86 Error  Codes

Code#

Definition

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10
12

13
14
15
18

19
20

21
22
23
24
25

NO  ERROR
FUNCTION NOT  IMPLEMENTED
ILLEGAL FUNCTION  NUMBER
CAN'T FIND  MEMORY
ILLEGAL SYSTEM  FLAG NUMBER
FLAG  OVERRUN
FLAG  UNDERRUN
NO  UNUSED QUEUE DESCRIPTORS
LEFT  IN  QD TABLE
NO  UNUSED QUEUE BUFFER AREA LEFT
CANT FIND  QUEUE
QUEUE IN USE
NO  UNUSED  PROCESS DESCRIPTORS
LEFT  IN  PROCESS  DESCRIPTOR  TABLE
QUEUE ACCESS DENIED
EMPTY  QUEUE
FULL QUEUE
NO  UNUSED MEMORY  DESCRIPTORS
LEFT  IN  MEMORY  DESCRIPTOR TABLE
ILLEGAL  CONSOLE  NUMBER
CANT FIND  PROCESS  DESCRIPTOR
BYNAME
CONSOLE  DOES  NOT  MATCH
NO  CLI  PROCESS
ILLEGAL DISK NUMBER
ILLEGAL FILE  NAME
ILLEGAL FILE TYPE

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

C-l

C  Error  Codes

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

Table  C-l. 

(continued)

Code#

Definition

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

CHARACTER  NOT  READY
ILLEGAL MEMORY  DESCRIPTOR
BAD  LOAD
BAD READ
BAD  OPEN
NULL  COMMAND
NOT  OWNER
NO  CODE  SEGMENT  IN  LOAD FILE
ACTIVE  PROCESS DESCRIPTOR
CANT  TERMINATE
CAN'T  ATTACH
ILLEGAL LIST DEVICE NUMBER
ILLEGAL PASSWORD

End  of  Appendix  C

C-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Appendix  D
ECHO.A86 Listing

ECHO  -  R e s i d e nt  System  Process
P r i nt  Command  t a il  to  c o n s o le

DEFINITIONS

ccpwint 
c _ w r i t e s tr 
c_detach 
c_set 
q_make 
q_open 
q_read 
q_wnte 
p _ p r i o n ty 

e qu 
equ 
equ 

equ 

equ 
9 
147 
148 
equ 
equ 
equ 
equ 
145 

pdlen 

equ 

48 

p  ens
p_disk
p_use r
P _ l l St
ps_run
pf_keep

rsp_top
rsp  pd
rsp_uda
rsp  b o t t om

e qu 

equ 

b y te
equ
equ
equ
equ
equ

equ
equ
equ
140h

i c c pm  e n t ry  i n t e r r u pt

224 
J p r i n t s t n nS
i d e t a ch  c o n s o le
i s et  d e f a u lt  c o n s o le
134 
135 
137 
139 
iset  p r i o r i ty

i c r e a te  q u e ue
i o p en  q u e ue
i r e ad  q u e ue
i w n te  q u e ue

i l e n s th  of  Process
i  Desc r i P to r

pt r

h 

i d e f a u lt  ens

b
b y te  Ptr 012h 
b
b y te  P tr 013h 
b
b y te  Ptr  024h 
0
2

iPD  run  s t a t us
5PD  n o K i ll

i d e f a u lt  d i sK
i d e f a u lt  user
i d e f a u lt  l i st

0
0
0
i e nd  r sp  h e a d er
i

i r s p o f f s et
iPD  offset
iUDA  offset

qf  rsp 

equ 

OBh 

iqueue  RSP

Listing D-l.  ECHO.A86

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

D-l

D  ECHO.A86  Listing

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

CODE  SEGMENT

CSEG
o r* 0

ccpm:

int  c c p m i nt
ret

main: 

t c r e a te  ECHO  queue

MOU  c l » q _ M a ke  ! MOU  d x » o f f s et  id
call  CCPM

•open  ECHO  queue
MOU  cl »q_open  !  MOM  d x » o f f s et  qpb
call  CCPM

?set  p r i o r i ty  to  normal

MOV  cl » p _ p r io ri ty  ! M OW  dx>200
c a ll  CCPM

5ES  p o i n ts  to  SYSDAT

MOU  es > s d a t s e*

IOOP: 

i f o r e v er

i r e ad  c m d t a il  from  queue

MOU  c l » q _ r e ad  ! MOU  dx »of f set
c a ll  CCPM

5 s et  d e f a u lt  u a l u es 

f r oM  PD

5p_disK=0-15
imake  d i s K = l - 16

MOU  bx  » p d ad r
MOU  dl  » es :  p _ d i s K C b x]
!  MOU d i s K t dl
inc  dl 
MOU  d 1 » es : p_use r [ bx ]
MOU  use  r  » dl
M OU  d l » e s : p _ l i s t C b x]
MOU  l i st  > dl
MOU  dl  > es : p _ c n s C b x]
M OU  c o n s o le  » dl

Listing  D-l. 

(continued)

D-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86 Programmer's  Guide

D ECHO.A86 Listing

!set  d e f a u lt  c o n s o le

5 

mou  dl . c o n s o 1e
m ou  cl.C  SET  '  c a ll  CCPN

!scan  c m d t a il  and  l o ok  for  '$'  or  0.
i w h en  f o u n d*  r e p l a ce  w/  c r . lf »'$'

lea  b x . c m d t a il 
m ou  d x  » b x  '  add  d x  » 1 3 1

'  m ou  a 1  > ' $ '  '  m ou  a h  » 0

n e x t c h a r:

e n d c md

c mp  b x » dx  '  ja  e n d c md
c mp  Cbx ] > al  '  je  e n d c md
'  je  e n d c md
cmp  C b x ] » ah 

me  bx  ' jmps  n e x t c h ar

mou  b x te  P tr  C b x ] » 13
m ou  b v te  P tr  l C b x ] > 10
m ou  b v te  Ptr  2 C b x ]  t ' $ '

iw n te  c o m m a nd  t a il
lea  d x » c m d t a il  '  mou  c 1 »C_WRITESTR
c a ll  ccpm

i d e t a ch  c o n s o le

m ou  dl ^ c o n s o le
mou  c l » c _ d e t a ch  '  call  ccpm

i d o n e>  Set  n e xt  c o m m a nd

l o op

DATA  SEGMENT

DSEG
o r$ 

rsp_tOP

sdatse 3

dw
dw
dw

0.0.0
0.0>0
0.0

Listing D-l. 

(continued)

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

D-3

D  ECHO.A86 Listing

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's Guide

pd

uda

o r*

T SP  pd

dw
db
db
dw
db
dw
db
db
dw
dw
db
dw
db
db
db
db
dw

' 

0 ,0 
ps_run 
190 
pf_Keep 
'ECHO 
offset  uda/lOh 
0 >0 
0 »0 
0 
0,0 
0,0
0
0 
0,0,0
0 
0»0»0
0 >0 »0 ,0

;  l i nK ,th read
i  status
i p r i o r i ty
! fla*s
i  name
i  uda  sed
i  disk ,use r
i  load  dsk ,us r
i mem
5  du rac t ,wai t

5  console

?  l i st

or*

TSP  uda

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

»20h

i l Oh

50

O t o f f s et  dma,0»0 
0 >0 »0 »0
0»0»0,0 
0 »0 >0 >0
0 » 0 » 0 >0 
0 »0 »0 >0
0 » 0 > o f f s et  s t a c k _ t o s »0  530h
0 >0 »0 »0
0,0>0»0 
0 >0 »0 ,0
0 »0 »0 ,0 
0 »0 ,0 »0
0 » 0 » 0 »0 

560h

!40h

!50h

o r*

r s p _ b o t t om

sbuf

rb 

131

iOueue  b u f f er

Listing D-l. 

(continued)

D-4

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Programmer's  Guide

D  ECHO.A86  Listing

dw
db
dw
db
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

rb

dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw
dw

rw
rb
db

db
dw
dw
dw
db

db
db
db
db

i l i nK
5net »o r3
i f l a is
5name
5ms $1 en
i n ms 3s
idq »nq
5 (ii s 3 c n t
i b u f f e r

» m s 3 o u t
a d d r ,

.Occcch
.Occcch
.Occcch
.Occcch
.Occcch

!  start  offset
i  s t a rt  sea
5  i n it  fla^s

5  OPB  B u f f er
5  starts 

he re

imust  be  zero
i q u e ue  ID
?nms 3s
ibuf f e r  add r.
iname  to  open

0
0,0
qf_rsp
'ECHO
131
1
0.0
0.0
offset  qbuf

128

Occcch .Occcch
O c c c ch .Occcch
Occcch .Occcch
Occcch .Occcch
O c c c ch .Occcch
o f f s et  main
0
0

1
129
13 .10 » '$'

0.0
0
1
offset  p d a dr
'ECHO

0
0
0
0

Listing D-l. 

(continued)

End  of  Appendix  D

dm a

stacK

stack_tos

pdad r
c m d t ai 1

spb

console
i d i sK
iuse r
Uist

end

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

D-5

Index

8080 and  Small  RSP Models 

.

Basic  Disk  Operating  System,  1-11,

(Figure  5-1),  5-2

8080  keyword, 4-8
8080  Memory  Model,  3-4,  3-6,  4-1,

4-2,  5-4

96-byte  initial stack,  3-1

absolute  address, 4-9
ACB -  Assign Control  Block
(Figure  6-1),  6-22

access stamp,  6-90
ALO

AL1,  6-51

Allocation  Block  Mask,  6-50
Allocation  Block  Shift  Factor,  6-50
allocation  vector,  6-47
ambiguous  reference,  6-106
APB  - Abort  Parameter Block
(Figure  6-10),  6-46

Archive attribute
T3',  2-16

attribute  bits,  2-15
A_Base,  3-4

B

base  extent,  6-101,  6-123
Base  Page  Initialization,  3-4
Base  Page

8080  Model,  4-3
Compact  Model,  4-6
initial  data  segment,  3-1
Small  Model,  4-4

DIGITAL RESEARCHrw

2-1
BDOS,  1-11
BDOS  Error  mode,  6-79
BDOS  Multisector Count,  6-120
BDOS  physical  errors,  2-47
BDOS  Version Number  Format
(Figure  6-17),  6-182

BIOS  Descriptor  Format

(Figure  6-18),  6-183

bit  map,  6-57
BLM,  6-50
blocking/deblocking,  2-42,  6-53
BSH,  6-50
burst  mode,  2-37

CCB,  1-12
Character  Control  Block,  1-12,  6-156,

6-157

checksum,  2-29,  6-89
Checksum  Vector  Size,  6-52
checksum  verification,  2-29
child  process,  5-11
CIO,  1-12
CKS,  6-52
CLI  Command  Line  Buffer
(Figure  6-11),  6-150

CLOCK  process,  1-9
Close  Checksum  error,  2-50
closing  files,  2-30
CMD  file,  1-14,  3-1,  5-1
CMD  File Header  Format
(Figure  3-1),  3-2

Index-1

Code Group  Descriptor,  5-2
command  file,  1-14
Command  Line  Buffer,  6-151
Command  Line  Interpreter,  2-6,  2-7
Command  RSP,  5-4
Compact  Memory  Model,  3-3,  4-1,

4-6

compatibility  attribute  definition,

2-34

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Base  Page
Values  (Figure  3-3),  3-5
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Functional

Modules  (Figure  1-2),  1-3
Concurrent  CP/M-86  Small  Memory

3-4,  4-1,  4-4

Concurrent  CP/M-86  Virtual/
Physical  Environments
(Figure  1-1),  1-1
conditional  read,  1-8
conditional  write,  1-8
Console  Buffer  Format  (Figure  6-2),

6-34

contiguous  memory  segment,  6-138
control  characters,  6-33
converting 8080 programs  to

Concurrent  CP/M-86, 4-9

CPB  -  Call  Parameter  Block
(Figure  6-14),  6-167

CR  field,  3-7
CTRL-Z at  EOF,  2-10
current  record  field,  6-88
current  record  position,  3-7
current  user  number,  6-119
CX  error  codes,  1-15
C^ASSIGN  system  call,  6-22
C-ATTACH  system  call,  6-24
C_CATTACH  system  call,  6-25
C_DELIMIT  system  call,  6-26
C_DETACH  system  call,  6-27
C_GET  system call,  6-28

C_MODE  system  call,  6-29
C_RAWIO system  call,  6-31
C_READ system  call,  6-33
C_READSTR  system  call,  6-34
C_SET system  call,  6-37
C_STAT  system  call,  6-38
C_WRITE system  call,  6-39
C_WRITEBLK  system  call,  6-40
C_WRITESTR  system  call,  6-41

D

data  area,  2-1
data  block  size,  2-9
Data  Group  Descriptor,  5-2,  5-12
default  DMA  base,  6-78
default  DMA  buffer,  3-6
default  drive,  3-5
Default  Error  mode,  2-48
Delay  List,  6-155
Delete  mode,  2-23
delimiters,  2-6,  6-93
detach  character,  6-33
DEV_POLL  system call,  1-13,  6-42
DEV_SETFLAG  system  call,  6-43
DEV.WAITFLAG  system  call,  1-9,

6-44
DIR  utility,  2-1
Direct  Memory  Address,  6-77
Directory  Allocation  Vectors,  6-51
directory  area,  2-1
directory  code,  2-51,  2-53
directory  label,  2-3,  2-19,  2-20,  2-56,

2-61

directory  label  data  byte,  6-56,  6-61
Directory  Label  Format  (Figure  2-2),

2-19

Directory  Maximum,  6-51

Index-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Directory  Record  with  SFCB
(Figure  2-4),  2-25
disk  directory  area,  2-9
Disk  Free  Space  Field  Format
(Figure  6-5),  6-66

Disk  I/O  error,  2-47
Disk  Parameter  Block,  2-44,  6-50
Disk  Reset,  2-45,  6-52
Disk  Storage  Maximum,  6-51
Disk  System  Reset  (Figure 2-6),  2-45
Dispatcher,  1-6
DMA  address,  3-1
DMA  base,  3-1
DMA  Buffer,  5-7,  5-10,  6-77
DMA  offset,  3-1,  6-76,  6-160
DMA

default  address,  6-48

DPB,  2-44,  6-49
DPB  -  Disk  Parameter  Block
(Figure  6-4),  6-50

drive capacity,  2-9
drive  specifier,  2-5 
drives,  2-9

»

drive-related  system  calls,  2-3

DRM,  6-51
DRV_ACCESS  system  call,  2-46,

6-46

DRV_ALLOCVEC  system call,  6-47
DRV^KLLRESET  system  call,  2-43,

3-1,  6-48

DRV_DPB system  call,  6-49
DRV_FLUSH  system call,  6-53
DRV_FREE,  2-32
DRV_FREE  system  call,  2-46,  6-54
DRV_CET  system  call,  6-55
DRV_CETLABEL system  call,  6-56
DRV_LOCINVEC  system call,  6-57
DRV_RESET  system call, 2-44,  6-58
DRV_ROVEC  system call,  6-59
DRV_SET  system  call, 6-60 

, 

,

DRV_SETLABEL system  call,  2-21,

6-61

DRV_SETRO  system  call,  2-47,  2-49,

6-64

DRV_SPACE system  call,  6-65
DSM,  6-51

ECHO,  5-3,  5-8,  5-12
EOF  (CTRL-Z),  2-10
error  codes,  1-15,  2-50,  2-51
error  flag,  2-51,  2-54
error  handling,  2-47
Error  Mode,  2-3
EXM,  6-51
extended  errors,  2-47,  2-48,  2-50
extent,  6-98,  6-120
Extent  Mask,  6-51

Far  Return,  3-1,  4-3
FCB -  File Control  Block  (Figure 2-1),

2-11

checksum,  2-29
format,  2-18
length,  2-11 
verification,  2-46

File  Namel,  3-6
File  Name2,  3-7

r 

-> 

•

file  access,  2-38
File  Already Exists error,  2-50
file  attributes,  6-67
set/reset,  2-15

File Control  Block,  2-10
File  Currently Open  error,

2-50

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

Index-3

File  ID,  2-13,  2-28,  2-39,  6-80,  6-89, 

6-116 

file  locking,  1-11 
file  naming conventions,  2-5 
File Opened in Read/Only Mode error, 

2-50 

file  references,  2-1 
file  security, 2-29 
file  size,  2-9 
file  specification,  2-5 
file  system,  2-3,  2-5,  2-9,  2-30,  2-41, 

2-42 

file-access  system calls, 2-2 
filename  field,  2-1,  2-5 
filetype  field,  2-1,  2-5 
Flag  1 

the  system  tick  flag,  1-10 

flush  buffers,  2-43 
Function  0,  6-170 
Function  1, 6-33 
Function  2, 6-39 
Function  5, 6-134 
Function  6,  6-31 
Function  9,  6-41 
Function  10, 6-34 
Function  11, 6-38 
Function  12, 6-182 
Function  13, 6-48 
Function  14, 6-60 
Function  15,  6-88 
Function  16, 6-70 
Function  17, 6-106 
Function  18, 6-110 
Function  19, 6-73 
Function  20,  6-98 
Function  21,  6-120 
Function  22,  6-84 
Function  23,  6-104 
Function  24,  6-57 
Function  25,  6-55 
Function  26,  6-77 

Index-4

• 

*** 

v 

Function  27,  6-47
Function  28,  6-64
Function  29,  6-59
Function  30,  6-67
Function  31,  6-49
Function  32,  6-119
Function  33,  6-101
Function  34,  6-123
Function  35,  6-108
Function  36,  6-97
Function  37,  6-58
Function  38,  6-46
Function  39,  6-54
Function  40,  6-128
Function  42,  6-80
Function  43,  6-116
Function  44,  6-87
Function  45,  6-79
Function  46,  6-65
Function  47,  6-149
Function  48,  6-53
Function  50,  6-183
Function  51,  6-78
Function  52,  6-76
Function  53,  6-145
Function  54,  6-140
Function  55,  6-142
Function  56,  6-143
Function  57,  6-144
Function  58,  6-141
Function  59,  6-164
Function  99,  6-113
Function  100,  6-61
Function  101,  6-56
''  Function  102,  6-111
Function  103,  6-126
Function  104,  6-197
'  Function  105,  6-194
Function  106,  6-96
Function  107,  6-186
Function  109,  6-29

f

, « / " ,,

; 

*•

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Function  110,  6-26
Function  111,  6-40
Function  112,  6-135
Function  128,  6-138
Function  129,  6-138
Function  130,  6-139
Function  131,  6-44
Function  132,  6-43
Function  133,  6-42
Function  134,  6-176
Function  135,  6-179
Function  136,  6-175
Function  137,  6-180
Function  138,  6-173
Function  139,  6-181
Function  140,  6-174
Function  141,  6-162
Function  142,  6-163
Function  143,  6-169
Function  144,  6-153
Function  145,  6-166
Function  146,  6-24
Function  147,  6-27
Function  148,  6-37
Function  149,  6-22
Function  150,  6-150
Function  151,  6-167
Function  152,  6-91
Function  153,  6-28
Function  154,  6-187
Function  155,  6-196
Function  156,  6-165
Function  157,  6-146
Function  158,  6-129
Function  159,  6-131
Function  160,  6-133
Function  161,  6-130
Function  162,  6-25
Function  163,  6-184
Function  164,  6-132
F_ATTRIB system  call,  2-15,  6-67

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

F_CLOSE  system  call,  6-70
F_DELETE  system  call,  6-73
F_DMAGET  system  call,  6-76
F_DMAOFF system  call,  5-7,  6-77
F_DMASEG  system  call,  5-7,  6-78
F_ERRMODE  system  call,  6-79
F_FLUSH  system  call,  2-43
F_LOCK  system  call,  6-80
F_MAKE system call, 2-11,  2-15,  2-22,

2-29,  6-84

F_MULTISEC  system  call,  2-38,  6-87
F_OPEN system call, 2-11,  2-15,  2-27,

2-28,  2-29,  6-88

F_PARSE system call, 2-7,  3-1,  6-91,

6-151

F_PASSWD  system  call,  6-96
F_RANDREC  system  call,  6-97
F_READ  system  call,  6-98
F_READRAND  system  call,  6-101
F_RENAME  system  call,  6-104
F_SFIRST  system  call,  6-106
F_SIZE  system  call,  6-108
F_SNEXT system  call,  6-110
F_TIMEDATE  system  call,  6-111
F_TRUNCATE  system  call,  6-113
F_UNLOCK  system  call,  6-116
F_USERNUM  system  call,  6-119
F_WRITE  system  call,  6-120
F_WRITERAND  system  call,  6-123
F_WRITEXFCB  system  call,  2-23,

6-126

F_WRITEZF system  call,  6-128

G-Form,  3-2
GENCCPM,  5-1,  5-10
GENCMD,  4-8,  4-11,  5-2
Group  Descriptor,  3-2

Index-5

Group Descriptor Format  (Figure 3-2),

3-3
G_Length,  3-4
G_Max,  3-4
G_Min, 3-4

H

Hard  Disk, 6-52
header  record,  3-2

CMD  file,  4-1, 4-9

I

Illegal  ? in  FCB  error, 2-51
independent  group,  3-6
initial  stack,  4-7

8080  model,  4-2

Instruction  Pointer,  4-3,  6-161
INT  224, 1-15,  6-161
INT 225,  6-161
Intel  Hexadecimal  File  Format, 4-11
Intel  utilities,  4-9
interface attribute F5', 6-70, 6-73, 6-88
interface  attribute  F6', 6-70,  6-88
interface  attribute  f7', 6-89
interface  attribute  f8', 6-89
interface  attributes,  2-17, 2-18,  2-29
intermodule  communications,  1-5
Invalid  Drive error, 2-49
IRET  instruction, 5-9,  5-10
IRET  structure, 5-9,  5-11

K

K E EP  flag, 6-169

Index-6

Lock  List, 2-29, 2-30, 2-31, 2-41, 2-46,

6-81

Locked  mode, 2-27
log-in  operation, 2-44
logical  drive,  2-1, 2-8
login  vector, 6-57
L^TTACH  system  call, 6-129
L_CATTACH  system  call, 6-130
L_DETACH  system  call, 6-131
L_GET  system  call, 6-132
L_SET  system  call, 6-133
L_WRITE  system  call,  6-134
L_WRITEBLK  system  call, 6-135

M

M80  byte, 3-6
maximum  memory  size, 4-10
MCB  - Memory  Control  Block
(Figure 6-7),  6-135

MC^\BSALLOC  system  call, 6-140
MC^VBSMAX  system  call,  6-141
MC^VLLFREE  system  call,  6-142
MC^\LLOC  system  call,  6-143
MC_FREE  system  call,  6-144
MC_MAX  system  call, 6-145
media  change, 2-46
Media

Nonremovable, 6-52

MEM,  1-10
Memory  Control  Block, 6-135
memory  models,  4-1
Memory  Module,  1-10
memory  protection, 6-154
memory,  3-7

absolute,  6-140 
initialization,  3-1
largest  available  region, 6-145

- 

.

no) DIGITAL RESEARCH1

r

MFPB - M_FREE  Parameter  Block

(Figure 6-9),  6-139
minimum  memory  value,  4-9
MPB  - Memory  Parameter  Block
Multisector  Count,  2-3,  2-38,  6-77,
6-80,  6-87,  6-98,  6-102, 6-103,
6-124,  6-125

I/O,2-37

mutual  exclusion  queues,  1-8
MX  queue,  1-8
MXdisk,  1-9
M_ALLOC  system  call,  6-138
M_FREE  system  call,  6-139

N

networking  interfaces,  1-5
No  Room  In  System  Lock  List  error,

2-51

not-8080 model, 3-6
Nonremovable  Media  Drives,  6-52

o

OFF,  6-52
one  second  flag
Flag  2,  1-9

Open  File  Limit  Exceeded  error,  2-51
open  mode,  2-27
Operating  System  Version  Number

Format  (Figure 6-19),  6-185

PI  Len,  3-6
P2  Len,  3-6
parent/child  relationship,  3-7
parse  filename,  2-7

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Parse Filename Control  Block,  6-91
password,  2-1,  2-23,  2-24
password  1 address, 3-6
password  2 address,  3-6
Password error,  2-50

field,  2-5
length,  3-6
protection,  2-23

PD - Process Descriptor  (Figure  6-12),

6-154

permanent  drive,  2-44,  2-47
PFCB  -  Parse  Filename  Control  Block

(Figure 6-6),  6-91

physical  error,  2-47
physical  error codes,  2-55
Physical  Record  Shift  Factor,  6-52
Poll List,  6-155
printer  echo,  6-33
priority  levels,  1-7
priority,  6-156,  6-166

transient  process,  5-4
process,  1-2,  2-30,  2-37
Process  Descriptor,  1-6,  1-9,  6-154

initialization,  3-1
process priority,  6-162
PSH,  6-52
P_ABORT  system  call,  6-146
P_CHAIN  system  call,  2-18,  6-149
P_CLI  system  call,  2-18,  3-1,  6-33,

6-150

P_CREATE  system  call,  3-1,  5-1,

6-153

P_DELAY  system  call,  1-10,  6-162
P_DISPATCH  system  call,  6-163
P_LOAD  system  call,  3-4,  4-2,  6-164
P_PDADR  system  call,  5-6,  6-165
P_PRIORITY  system  call,  6-166
P_RPL  system  call,  6-167
P_TERM  system  call,  3-1,  6-33,

6-169

P_TERMCPM  system  call,  6-170

Index-7

QD  - Queue  Descriptor  (Figure 6-16),

6-176

QPB  - Queue  Parameter Block
(Figure  6-15),  6-171

qualified  reset,  2-44
Queue  Buffer,  1-8
Queue  Descriptor,  1-9,  6-176

RSP  Command  Queue,  5-10

Queue  Parameter Block,  5-11
Q_CREAD system call, 5-5,  6-173
Q_CWRITE  system  call,  6-174
Q_DELETE  system  call, 5-10,  6-175
Q_MAKE  system call,  5-10,  6-176
Q_OPEN  system  call,  6-179
Q_READ  system call,  1-8,  5-5,  6-180
Q_WRITE  system call,  6-181

R/O  drive reset,  2-45
R/O  Vector,  6-59
Random  Record  Number,  2-10,  3-7,

6-80,  6-97,  6-101, 6-108, 6-116,
6-123
Read  mode,  2-23
Read  Queue  List,  6-155
Read-Only  attribute Tl',  2-16,  6-89
Read-Only  mode,  2-28,  2-38
Read/Only  Disk  error,  2-49
Read/Only  File error,  2-49
Ready  List,  1-6,  6-155
ready  process,  1-6
Real-Time Monitor, 1-5
record  locking,  2-30,  2-39
register  AL,  2-53
register contents  preserved,  1-15
register  initialization,  5-10
registers used by system calls,  1-15

Index-8

removable  drive,  2-44,  2-47
reset  permanent drive,  2-44
reset  removable drive, 2-44
reset  state, 6-48,  6-58
Resident  Procedure  Library,  6-167
Resident  System  Processes, 5-1,  6-151
Return  and  Display Error mode,  2-48,

6-79

return  codes,  2-51
Return  Error mode,  2-48,  6-79
RSP  Command  Queue,  5-4
RSP  Command  Queue  Message

(Figure  5-3),  5-5

RSP  copies

8080  Models,  5-4
Small  Model,  5-4

RSP  Data  Segment  (Figure 5-4),  5-7
RSP  Header,  5-3,  5-7
RSP  Header  Format  (Figure 5-2),  5-3
RSP  Memory  Models,  5-1
RSP  Process  Descriptor,  5-5,  5-6,  5-7,

5-8,  5-9

RSP  Stack,  5-9
RSP  UDA,  5-7
RSP  User  Data  Area,  5-9
RSP

8080  Memory  Model,  5-2 
CMD  Header  Record,  5-2
ECHO, 5-1
multiple copies,  5-3 
Process Descriptor,  5-1
shared  code,  5-4
Small  Memory  Model,  5-2
TMP,  5-3
UDA,  5-1

.

RTM,  1-5
RUN  state,  6-43,  6-44,  6-175

s

DIGITAL  RESEARCH™

System  Queue,  1-8,  6-178
System  Tick, 6-162,  6-163
system  timing,  1-9
S_BDOSVER  system call,  6-182
S_BIOS  system call,  6-183
S_OSVER  system call,  6-184
S_SERIAL  system  call,  6-186
S_SYSDAT  system  call,  6-187

tab  character,  6-33
termination  character,  6-33
Termination  Code, 6-147,  6-169
time-of-day,  1-9,  6-194
time  stamping,  2-3
TOD  - Time-of-Day  Structure
(Figure  6-22),  6-194

Track  Offset,  6-52
Transient  Process  Area,  6-153
transient  processes,  1-2,  1-5
transient  programs,  1-14
T_GET  system  call,  6-194
T_SECONDS  system  call,  6-196
T_SET  system  call,  6-197

Sectors  Per Track,  6-50
segment  group  memory requirements,

4-8

segment  register change,  4-6
segment  register  initialization,  4-2
sequential  I/O  processing,  2-38
SERIAL  Number  Format
(Figure  6-20),  6-186

SFCB  Subfields  (Figure 2-5),  2-26
Shared  access  to  files,  1-11
Small  Memory  Model,  3-4,  4-2,  4-4
sparse  files,  2-10
SPT,  6-50
Stack  Pointer,  6-160
stamp,  6-86
start  scroll  character,  6-30
stop  scroll  character,  6-30
SUP,  1-5
Supervisor,  1-5
suspended  process,  1-6
SYSDAT Table  (Figure 6-21),  6-188
system  attribute  T2',  2-16,  6-189
system  call  calling conventions,  1-15
system  call  register  initialization,  1-15
System  Data  Area,  5-6,  5-8,  5-9
System  Data  Segment,  6-153,  6-178
SYSTEM  flag,  6-169
system  generation,  5-1
system  Lock  List,  6-46,  6-54
system  performance,  1-7
system  process
TICK,  1-9

system  processes,  1-2

DIGITAL RESEARCH™

Index-9

u

UDA  -  User  Data  Area  (Figure 6-13),

6-159
UDA,  1-6

,.

initialization,  3-1 
unconditional  read,  1-8
Unlocked  mode,  2-28,  2-38
UserO,  2-19
User  Data  Area,  6-153,  6-159
user  directories,  2-18
user  number,  2-1,  2-18

virtual  file  size,  6-108

w

Write  mode,  2-23
Write  Queue  List,  6-155

XFCB,  2-21
XFCB  -  Extended  File Control  Block

(Figure  2-3),  2-21

XFCB  password  mode, 6-111,  6-126
XIOS,  1-13

Index-10

M  DIGITAL RESEARCH1

